Emma Woodhouse, handsome, clever, and rich, with a comfortable home
and happy disposition, seemed to unite some of the best blessings
of existence; and had lived nearly twenty-one years in the world
She was the youngest of the two daughters of a most affectionate,
indulgent father; and had, in consequence of her sister's marriage,
been mistress of his house from a very early period.  Her mother
had died too long ago for her to have more than an indistinct
remembrance of her caresses; and her place had been supplied
by an excellent woman as governess, who had fallen little short
Sixteen years had Miss Taylor been in Mr. Woodhouse's family,
less as a governess than a friend, very fond of both daughters,
but particularly of Emma.  Between them it was more the intimacy
of sisters.  Even before Miss Taylor had ceased to hold the nominal
office of governess, the mildness of her temper had hardly allowed
her to impose any restraint; and the shadow of authority being
now long passed away, they had been living together as friend and
friend very mutually attached, and Emma doing just what she liked;
highly esteeming Miss Taylor's judgment, but directed chiefly by
The real evils, indeed, of Emma's situation were the power of having
rather too much her own way, and a disposition to think a little
too well of herself; these were the disadvantages which threatened
alloy to her many enjoyments.  The danger, however, was at present
so unperceived, that they did not by any means rank as misfortunes
Sorrow came--a gentle sorrow--but not at all in the shape of any
disagreeable consciousness.--Miss Taylor married.  It was Miss
Taylor's loss which first brought grief.  It was on the wedding-day
of this beloved friend that Emma first sat in mournful thought
of any continuance.  The wedding over, and the bride-people gone,
her father and herself were left to dine together, with no prospect
of a third to cheer a long evening.  Her father composed himself
to sleep after dinner, as usual, and she had then only to sit
The event had every promise of happiness for her friend.  Mr. Weston
was a man of unexceptionable character, easy fortune, suitable age,
and pleasant manners; and there was some satisfaction in considering
with what self-denying, generous friendship she had always wished
and promoted the match; but it was a black morning's work for her. 
The want of Miss Taylor would be felt every hour of every day. 
She recalled her past kindness--the kindness, the affection of sixteen
years--how she had taught and how she had played with her from five
years old--how she had devoted all her powers to attach and amuse
her in health--and how nursed her through the various illnesses
of childhood.  A large debt of gratitude was owing here; but the
intercourse of the last seven years, the equal footing and perfect
unreserve which had soon followed Isabella's marriage, on their
being left to each other, was yet a dearer, tenderer recollection. 
She had been a friend and companion such as few possessed: intelligent,
well-informed, useful, gentle, knowing all the ways of the family,
interested in all its concerns, and peculiarly interested in herself,
in every pleasure, every scheme of hers--one to whom she could speak
every thought as it arose, and who had such an affection for her
How was she to bear the change?--It was true that her friend was
going only half a mile from them; but Emma was aware that great must
be the difference between a Mrs. Weston, only half a mile from them,
and a Miss Taylor in the house; and with all her advantages,
natural and domestic, she was now in great danger of suffering
from intellectual solitude.  She dearly loved her father, but he
was no companion for her.  He could not meet her in conversation,
The evil of the actual disparity in their ages (and Mr. Woodhouse had
not married early) was much increased by his constitution and habits;
for having been a valetudinarian all his life, without activity
of mind or body, he was a much older man in ways than in years;
and though everywhere beloved for the friendliness of his heart
and his amiable temper, his talents could not have recommended him
Her sister, though comparatively but little removed by matrimony,
being settled in London, only sixteen miles off, was much beyond
her daily reach; and many a long October and November evening must
be struggled through at Hartfield, before Christmas brought the next
visit from Isabella and her husband, and their little children,
to fill the house, and give her pleasant society again. 
Highbury, the large and populous village, almost amounting to a town,
to which Hartfield, in spite of its separate lawn, and shrubberies,
and name, did really belong, afforded her no equals.  The Woodhouses
were first in consequence there.  All looked up to them.  She had
many acquaintance in the place, for her father was universally civil,
but not one among them who could be accepted in lieu of Miss
Taylor for even half a day.  It was a melancholy change; and Emma
could not but sigh over it, and wish for impossible things,
till her father awoke, and made it necessary to be cheerful. 
His spirits required support.  He was a nervous man, easily depressed;
fond of every body that he was used to, and hating to part with them;
hating change of every kind.  Matrimony, as the origin of change,
was always disagreeable; and he was by no means yet reconciled
to his own daughter's marrying, nor could ever speak of her but
with compassion, though it had been entirely a match of affection,
when he was now obliged to part with Miss Taylor too; and from
his habits of gentle selfishness, and of being never able to
suppose that other people could feel differently from himself,
he was very much disposed to think Miss Taylor had done as sad
a thing for herself as for them, and would have been a great deal
happier if she had spent all the rest of her life at Hartfield. 
Emma smiled and chatted as cheerfully as she could, to keep him
from such thoughts; but when tea came, it was impossible for him
"Poor Miss Taylor!--I wish she were here again.  What a pity it
"I cannot agree with you, papa; you know I cannot.  Mr. Weston is such
a good-humoured, pleasant, excellent man, that he thoroughly deserves
a good wife;--and you would not have had Miss Taylor live with us
for ever, and bear all my odd humours, when she might have a house of her own?"
"A house of her own!--But where is the advantage of a house of her own?
This is three times as large.--And you have never any odd humours,
"How often we shall be going to see them, and they coming to see
us!--We shall be always meeting! We must begin; we must go and pay
"My dear, how am I to get so far? Randalls is such a distance. 
"No, papa, nobody thought of your walking.  We must go in the carriage,
"The carriage! But James will not like to put the horses to for
such a little way;--and where are the poor horses to be while we
"They are to be put into Mr. Weston's stable, papa.  You know we
have settled all that already.  We talked it all over with Mr. Weston
last night.  And as for James, you may be very sure he will always like
going to Randalls, because of his daughter's being housemaid there. 
I only doubt whether he will ever take us anywhere else.  That was
your doing, papa.  You got Hannah that good place.  Nobody thought
of Hannah till you mentioned her--James is so obliged to you!"
"I am very glad I did think of her.  It was very lucky, for I would
not have had poor James think himself slighted upon any account;
and I am sure she will make a very good servant: she is a civil,
pretty-spoken girl; I have a great opinion of her.  Whenever I see her,
she always curtseys and asks me how I do, in a very pretty manner;
and when you have had her here to do needlework, I observe she
always turns the lock of the door the right way and never bangs it. 
I am sure she will be an excellent servant; and it will be a great
comfort to poor Miss Taylor to have somebody about her that she is
used to see.  Whenever James goes over to see his daughter, you know,
she will be hearing of us.  He will be able to tell her how we
Emma spared no exertions to maintain this happier flow of ideas,
and hoped, by the help of backgammon, to get her father tolerably
through the evening, and be attacked by no regrets but her own. 
The backgammon-table was placed; but a visitor immediately afterwards
Mr. Knightley, a sensible man about seven or eight-and-thirty, was not
only a very old and intimate friend of the family, but particularly
connected with it, as the elder brother of Isabella's husband. 
He lived about a mile from Highbury, was a frequent visitor,
and always welcome, and at this time more welcome than usual,
as coming directly from their mutual connexions in London.  He had
returned to a late dinner, after some days' absence, and now walked
up to Hartfield to say that all were well in Brunswick Square. 
It was a happy circumstance, and animated Mr. Woodhouse for some time. 
Mr. Knightley had a cheerful manner, which always did him good;
and his many inquiries after "poor Isabella" and her children were
answered most satisfactorily.  When this was over, Mr. Woodhouse
gratefully observed, "It is very kind of you, Mr. Knightley, to come
out at this late hour to call upon us.  I am afraid you must have
"Not at all, sir.  It is a beautiful moonlight night; and so mild
"But you must have found it very damp and dirty.  I wish you may
"Dirty, sir! Look at my shoes.  Not a speck on them."
"Well! that is quite surprising, for we have had a vast deal
of rain here.  It rained dreadfully hard for half an hour
while we were at breakfast.  I wanted them to put off the wedding."
"By the bye--I have not wished you joy.  Being pretty well aware
of what sort of joy you must both be feeling, I have been in no hurry
with my congratulations; but I hope it all went off tolerably well. 
"Poor Mr. and Miss Woodhouse, if you please; but I cannot possibly
say `poor Miss Taylor.' I have a great regard for you and Emma;
but when it comes to the question of dependence or independence!--At
any rate, it must be better to have only one to please than two."
"Especially when one of those two is such a fanciful, troublesome creature!"
said Emma playfully.  "That is what you have in your head,
I know--and what you would certainly say if my father were not by."
"I believe it is very true, my dear, indeed," said Mr. Woodhouse,
with a sigh.  "I am afraid I am sometimes very fanciful and troublesome."
"My dearest papa! You do not think I could mean you, or suppose
Mr. Knightley to mean you.  What a horrible idea! Oh no! I meant
only myself.  Mr. Knightley loves to find fault with me, you know--
in a joke--it is all a joke.  We always say what we like to one another."
Mr. Knightley, in fact, was one of the few people who could see
faults in Emma Woodhouse, and the only one who ever told her of them:
and though this was not particularly agreeable to Emma herself,
she knew it would be so much less so to her father, that she would
not have him really suspect such a circumstance as her not being
"Emma knows I never flatter her," said Mr. Knightley, "but I
meant no reflection on any body.  Miss Taylor has been used
to have two persons to please; she will now have but one. 
"Well," said Emma, willing to let it pass--"you want to hear
about the wedding; and I shall be happy to tell you, for we all
behaved charmingly.  Every body was punctual, every body in their
best looks: not a tear, and hardly a long face to be seen.  Oh no;
we all felt that we were going to be only half a mile apart,
"Dear Emma bears every thing so well," said her father. 
"But, Mr. Knightley, she is really very sorry to lose poor Miss Taylor,
and I am sure she will miss her more than she thinks for."
Emma turned away her head, divided between tears and smiles. 
"It is impossible that Emma should not miss such a companion,"
said Mr. Knightley.  "We should not like her so well as we do, sir,
if we could suppose it; but she knows how much the marriage is to
Miss Taylor's advantage; she knows how very acceptable it must be,
at Miss Taylor's time of life, to be settled in a home of her own,
and how important to her to be secure of a comfortable provision,
and therefore cannot allow herself to feel so much pain as pleasure. 
Every friend of Miss Taylor must be glad to have her so happily
"And you have forgotten one matter of joy to me," said Emma,
"and a very considerable one--that I made the match myself. 
I made the match, you know, four years ago; and to have it take place,
and be proved in the right, when so many people said Mr. Weston would
Mr. Knightley shook his head at her.  Her father fondly replied,
"Ah! my dear, I wish you would not make matches and foretell things,
for whatever you say always comes to pass.  Pray do not make any
"I promise you to make none for myself, papa; but I must, indeed,
for other people.  It is the greatest amusement in the world! And
after such success, you know!--Every body said that Mr. Weston would
never marry again.  Oh dear, no! Mr. Weston, who had been a widower
so long, and who seemed so perfectly comfortable without a wife,
so constantly occupied either in his business in town or among his
friends here, always acceptable wherever he went, always cheerful--
Mr. Weston need not spend a single evening in the year alone if he did
not like it.  Oh no! Mr. Weston certainly would never marry again. 
Some people even talked of a promise to his wife on her deathbed,
and others of the son and the uncle not letting him.  All manner
of solemn nonsense was talked on the subject, but I believed none
"Ever since the day--about four years ago--that Miss Taylor and I
met with him in Broadway Lane, when, because it began to drizzle,
he darted away with so much gallantry, and borrowed two umbrellas
for us from Farmer Mitchell's, I made up my mind on the subject. 
I planned the match from that hour; and when such success has blessed
me in this instance, dear papa, you cannot think that I shall leave
"I do not understand what you mean by `success,'" said Mr. Knightley. 
"Success supposes endeavour.  Your time has been properly and
delicately spent, if you have been endeavouring for the last four
years to bring about this marriage.  A worthy employment for a young
lady's mind! But if, which I rather imagine, your making the match,
as you call it, means only your planning it, your saying to yourself
one idle day, `I think it would be a very good thing for Miss Taylor
if Mr. Weston were to marry her,' and saying it again to yourself
every now and then afterwards, why do you talk of success? Where
is your merit? What are you proud of? You made a lucky guess;
"And have you never known the pleasure and triumph of a lucky guess?--
I pity you.--I thought you cleverer--for, depend upon it a lucky
guess is never merely luck.  There is always some talent in it. 
And as to my poor word `success,' which you quarrel with, I do not
know that I am so entirely without any claim to it.  You have drawn
two pretty pictures; but I think there may be a third--a something
between the do-nothing and the do-all. If I had not promoted Mr. Weston's
visits here, and given many little encouragements, and smoothed
many little matters, it might not have come to any thing after all. 
I think you must know Hartfield enough to comprehend that."
"A straightforward, open-hearted man like Weston, and a rational,
unaffected woman like Miss Taylor, may be safely left to manage their
own concerns.  You are more likely to have done harm to yourself,
"Emma never thinks of herself, if she can do good to others,"
rejoined Mr. Woodhouse, understanding but in part.  "But, my dear,
pray do not make any more matches; they are silly things, and break up
"Only one more, papa; only for Mr. Elton.  Poor Mr. Elton! You
like Mr. Elton, papa,--I must look about for a wife for him. 
There is nobody in Highbury who deserves him--and he has been
here a whole year, and has fitted up his house so comfortably,
that it would be a shame to have him single any longer--and I thought
when he was joining their hands to-day, he looked so very much as if
he would like to have the same kind office done for him! I think
very well of Mr. Elton, and this is the only way I have of doing
"Mr. Elton is a very pretty young man, to be sure, and a very
good young man, and I have a great regard for him.  But if you
want to shew him any attention, my dear, ask him to come
and dine with us some day.  That will be a much better thing. 
I dare say Mr. Knightley will be so kind as to meet him."
"With a great deal of pleasure, sir, at any time," said Mr. Knightley,
laughing, "and I agree with you entirely, that it will be a much
better thing.  Invite him to dinner, Emma, and help him to the best
of the fish and the chicken, but leave him to chuse his own wife. 
Depend upon it, a man of six or seven-and-twenty can take care
Mr. Weston was a native of Highbury, and born of a respectable family,
which for the last two or three generations had been rising into
gentility and property.  He had received a good education, but,
on succeeding early in life to a small independence, had become
indisposed for any of the more homely pursuits in which his brothers
were engaged, and had satisfied an active, cheerful mind and social
temper by entering into the militia of his county, then embodied. 
Captain Weston was a general favourite; and when the chances
of his military life had introduced him to Miss Churchill,
of a great Yorkshire family, and Miss Churchill fell in love
with him, nobody was surprized, except her brother and his wife,
who had never seen him, and who were full of pride and importance,
Miss Churchill, however, being of age, and with the full command
of her fortune--though her fortune bore no proportion to the
family-estate--was not to be dissuaded from the marriage, and it
took place, to the infinite mortification of Mr. and Mrs. Churchill,
who threw her off with due decorum.  It was an unsuitable connexion,
and did not produce much happiness.  Mrs. Weston ought to have found
more in it, for she had a husband whose warm heart and sweet temper
made him think every thing due to her in return for the great goodness
of being in love with him; but though she had one sort of spirit,
she had not the best.  She had resolution enough to pursue
her own will in spite of her brother, but not enough to refrain
from unreasonable regrets at that brother's unreasonable anger,
nor from missing the luxuries of her former home.  They lived beyond
their income, but still it was nothing in comparison of Enscombe:
she did not cease to love her husband, but she wanted at once
to be the wife of Captain Weston, and Miss Churchill of Enscombe. 
Captain Weston, who had been considered, especially by the Churchills,
as making such an amazing match, was proved to have much the worst
of the bargain; for when his wife died, after a three years' marriage,
he was rather a poorer man than at first, and with a child to maintain. 
From the expense of the child, however, he was soon relieved. 
The boy had, with the additional softening claim of a lingering
illness of his mother's, been the means of a sort of reconciliation;
and Mr. and Mrs. Churchill, having no children of their own,
nor any other young creature of equal kindred to care for, offered to
take the whole charge of the little Frank soon after her decease. 
Some scruples and some reluctance the widower-father may be supposed
to have felt; but as they were overcome by other considerations,
the child was given up to the care and the wealth of the Churchills,
and he had only his own comfort to seek, and his own situation to
A complete change of life became desirable.  He quitted the militia
and engaged in trade, having brothers already established in a
good way in London, which afforded him a favourable opening. 
It was a concern which brought just employment enough.  He had still
a small house in Highbury, where most of his leisure days were spent;
and between useful occupation and the pleasures of society,
the next eighteen or twenty years of his life passed cheerfully away. 
He had, by that time, realised an easy competence--enough to secure
the purchase of a little estate adjoining Highbury, which he had
always longed for--enough to marry a woman as portionless even
as Miss Taylor, and to live according to the wishes of his own
It was now some time since Miss Taylor had begun to influence
his schemes; but as it was not the tyrannic influence of youth
on youth, it had not shaken his determination of never settling
till he could purchase Randalls, and the sale of Randalls was long
looked forward to; but he had gone steadily on, with these objects
in view, till they were accomplished.  He had made his fortune,
bought his house, and obtained his wife; and was beginning a new
period of existence, with every probability of greater happiness
than in any yet passed through.  He had never been an unhappy man;
his own temper had secured him from that, even in his first marriage;
but his second must shew him how delightful a well-judging and truly
amiable woman could be, and must give him the pleasantest proof
of its being a great deal better to choose than to be chosen,
He had only himself to please in his choice: his fortune was
his own; for as to Frank, it was more than being tacitly brought
up as his uncle's heir, it had become so avowed an adoption
as to have him assume the name of Churchill on coming of age. 
It was most unlikely, therefore, that he should ever want his
father's assistance.  His father had no apprehension of it. 
The aunt was a capricious woman, and governed her husband entirely;
but it was not in Mr. Weston's nature to imagine that any caprice
could be strong enough to affect one so dear, and, as he believed,
so deservedly dear.  He saw his son every year in London,
and was proud of him; and his fond report of him as a very fine
young man had made Highbury feel a sort of pride in him too. 
He was looked on as sufficiently belonging to the place to make his
Mr. Frank Churchill was one of the boasts of Highbury, and a lively
curiosity to see him prevailed, though the compliment was so little
returned that he had never been there in his life.  His coming
to visit his father had been often talked of but never achieved. 
Now, upon his father's marriage, it was very generally proposed,
as a most proper attention, that the visit should take place. 
There was not a dissentient voice on the subject, either when
Mrs. Perry drank tea with Mrs. and Miss Bates, or when Mrs. and
Miss Bates returned the visit.  Now was the time for Mr. Frank
Churchill to come among them; and the hope strengthened when it was
understood that he had written to his new mother on the occasion. 
For a few days, every morning visit in Highbury included some mention
of the handsome letter Mrs. Weston had received.  "I suppose you
have heard of the handsome letter Mr. Frank Churchill has written
to Mrs. Weston? I understand it was a very handsome letter, indeed. 
Mr. Woodhouse told me of it.  Mr. Woodhouse saw the letter, and he
says he never saw such a handsome letter in his life."
It was, indeed, a highly prized letter.  Mrs. Weston had, of course,
formed a very favourable idea of the young man; and such a pleasing
attention was an irresistible proof of his great good sense,
and a most welcome addition to every source and every expression
of congratulation which her marriage had already secured.  She felt
herself a most fortunate woman; and she had lived long enough
to know how fortunate she might well be thought, where the only
regret was for a partial separation from friends whose friendship
for her had never cooled, and who could ill bear to part with her. 
She knew that at times she must be missed; and could not think,
without pain, of Emma's losing a single pleasure, or suffering
an hour's ennui, from the want of her companionableness: but dear
Emma was of no feeble character; she was more equal to her situation
than most girls would have been, and had sense, and energy,
and spirits that might be hoped would bear her well and happily
through its little difficulties and privations.  And then there was
such comfort in the very easy distance of Randalls from Hartfield,
so convenient for even solitary female walking, and in Mr. Weston's
disposition and circumstances, which would make the approaching
season no hindrance to their spending half the evenings in the
Her situation was altogether the subject of hours of gratitude
to Mrs. Weston, and of moments only of regret; and her
satisfaction---her more than satisfaction--her cheerful enjoyment,
was so just and so apparent, that Emma, well as she knew her father,
was sometimes taken by surprize at his being still able to pity
`poor Miss Taylor,' when they left her at Randalls in the centre
of every domestic comfort, or saw her go away in the evening
attended by her pleasant husband to a carriage of her own. 
But never did she go without Mr. Woodhouse's giving a gentle sigh,
and saying, "Ah, poor Miss Taylor! She would be very glad to stay."
There was no recovering Miss Taylor--nor much likelihood of
ceasing to pity her; but a few weeks brought some alleviation
to Mr. Woodhouse.  The compliments of his neighbours were over;
he was no longer teased by being wished joy of so sorrowful an event;
and the wedding-cake, which had been a great distress to him,
was all eat up.  His own stomach could bear nothing rich, and he
could never believe other people to be different from himself. 
What was unwholesome to him he regarded as unfit for any body;
and he had, therefore, earnestly tried to dissuade them from having
any wedding-cake at all, and when that proved vain, as earnestly
tried to prevent any body's eating it.  He had been at the pains
of consulting Mr. Perry, the apothecary, on the subject.  Mr. Perry
was an intelligent, gentlemanlike man, whose frequent visits were one
of the comforts of Mr. Woodhouse's life; and upon being applied to,
he could not but acknowledge (though it seemed rather against the
bias of inclination) that wedding-cake might certainly disagree
with many--perhaps with most people, unless taken moderately. 
With such an opinion, in confirmation of his own, Mr. Woodhouse hoped
to influence every visitor of the newly married pair; but still the
cake was eaten; and there was no rest for his benevolent nerves till
There was a strange rumour in Highbury of all the little Perrys
being seen with a slice of Mrs. Weston's wedding-cake in their
Mr. Woodhouse was fond of society in his own way.  He liked very much
to have his friends come and see him; and from various united causes,
from his long residence at Hartfield, and his good nature,
from his fortune, his house, and his daughter, he could command the
visits of his own little circle, in a great measure, as he liked. 
He had not much intercourse with any families beyond that circle;
his horror of late hours, and large dinner-parties, made him unfit
for any acquaintance but such as would visit him on his own terms. 
Fortunately for him, Highbury, including Randalls in the same parish,
and Donwell Abbey in the parish adjoining, the seat of Mr. Knightley,
comprehended many such.  Not unfrequently, through Emma's persuasion,
he had some of the chosen and the best to dine with him: but evening
parties were what he preferred; and, unless he fancied himself at any
time unequal to company, there was scarcely an evening in the week
in which Emma could not make up a card-table for him. 
Real, long-standing regard brought the Westons and Mr. Knightley;
and by Mr. Elton, a young man living alone without liking it,
the privilege of exchanging any vacant evening of his own blank solitude
for the elegancies and society of Mr. Woodhouse's drawing-room,
and the smiles of his lovely daughter, was in no danger of being
After these came a second set; among the most come-at-able
of whom were Mrs. and Miss Bates, and Mrs. Goddard, three ladies
almost always at the service of an invitation from Hartfield,
and who were fetched and carried home so often, that Mr. Woodhouse
thought it no hardship for either James or the horses.  Had it
taken place only once a year, it would have been a grievance. 
Mrs. Bates, the widow of a former vicar of Highbury, was a
very old lady, almost past every thing but tea and quadrille. 
She lived with her single daughter in a very small way, and was
considered with all the regard and respect which a harmless old lady,
under such untoward circumstances, can excite.  Her daughter enjoyed
a most uncommon degree of popularity for a woman neither young,
handsome, rich, nor married.  Miss Bates stood in the very worst
predicament in the world for having much of the public favour;
and she had no intellectual superiority to make atonement to herself,
or frighten those who might hate her into outward respect. 
She had never boasted either beauty or cleverness.  Her youth
had passed without distinction, and her middle of life was devoted
to the care of a failing mother, and the endeavour to make a small
income go as far as possible.  And yet she was a happy woman,
and a woman whom no one named without good-will.  It was her own
universal good-will and contented temper which worked such wonders. 
She loved every body, was interested in every body's happiness,
quicksighted to every body's merits; thought herself a most fortunate
creature, and surrounded with blessings in such an excellent mother,
and so many good neighbours and friends, and a home that wanted
for nothing.  The simplicity and cheerfulness of her nature,
her contented and grateful spirit, were a recommendation to every body,
and a mine of felicity to herself.  She was a great talker upon
little matters, which exactly suited Mr. Woodhouse, full of trivial
Mrs. Goddard was the mistress of a School--not of a seminary,
or an establishment, or any thing which professed, in long sentences of
refined nonsense, to combine liberal acquirements with elegant morality,
upon new principles and new systems--and where young ladies for
enormous pay might be screwed out of health and into vanity--but
a real, honest, old-fashioned Boarding-school, where a reasonable
quantity of accomplishments were sold at a reasonable price,
and where girls might be sent to be out of the way, and scramble
themselves into a little education, without any danger of coming
back prodigies.  Mrs. Goddard's school was in high repute--and
very deservedly; for Highbury was reckoned a particularly healthy
spot: she had an ample house and garden, gave the children plenty
of wholesome food, let them run about a great deal in the summer,
and in winter dressed their chilblains with her own hands. 
It was no wonder that a train of twenty young couple now walked
after her to church.  She was a plain, motherly kind of woman,
who had worked hard in her youth, and now thought herself entitled
to the occasional holiday of a tea-visit; and having formerly
owed much to Mr. Woodhouse's kindness, felt his particular claim
on her to leave her neat parlour, hung round with fancy-work,
whenever she could, and win or lose a few sixpences by his fireside. 
These were the ladies whom Emma found herself very frequently
able to collect; and happy was she, for her father's sake,
in the power; though, as far as she was herself concerned,
it was no remedy for the absence of Mrs. Weston.  She was delighted
to see her father look comfortable, and very much pleased with
herself for contriving things so well; but the quiet prosings
of three such women made her feel that every evening so spent
was indeed one of the long evenings she had fearfully anticipated. 
As she sat one morning, looking forward to exactly such a close
of the present day, a note was brought from Mrs. Goddard, requesting,
in most respectful terms, to be allowed to bring Miss Smith with her;
a most welcome request: for Miss Smith was a girl of seventeen,
whom Emma knew very well by sight, and had long felt an interest in,
on account of her beauty.  A very gracious invitation was returned,
and the evening no longer dreaded by the fair mistress of the mansion. 
Harriet Smith was the natural daughter of somebody.  Somebody had
placed her, several years back, at Mrs. Goddard's school,
and somebody had lately raised her from the condition of scholar
to that of parlour-boarder. This was all that was generally known
of her history.  She had no visible friends but what had been
acquired at Highbury, and was now just returned from a long visit
in the country to some young ladies who had been at school there with her. 
She was a very pretty girl, and her beauty happened to be of a sort
which Emma particularly admired.  She was short, plump, and fair,
with a fine bloom, blue eyes, light hair, regular features,
and a look of great sweetness, and, before the end of the evening,
Emma was as much pleased with her manners as her person, and quite
She was not struck by any thing remarkably clever in Miss Smith's
conversation, but she found her altogether very engaging--not
inconveniently shy, not unwilling to talk--and yet so far from pushing,
shewing so proper and becoming a deference, seeming so pleasantly
grateful for being admitted to Hartfield, and so artlessly
impressed by the appearance of every thing in so superior a style
to what she had been used to, that she must have good sense,
and deserve encouragement.  Encouragement should be given. 
Those soft blue eyes, and all those natural graces, should not be
wasted on the inferior society of Highbury and its connexions. 
The acquaintance she had already formed were unworthy of her. 
The friends from whom she had just parted, though very good sort
of people, must be doing her harm.  They were a family of the name
of Martin, whom Emma well knew by character, as renting a large farm
of Mr. Knightley, and residing in the parish of Donwell--very creditably,
she believed--she knew Mr. Knightley thought highly of them--but they
must be coarse and unpolished, and very unfit to be the intimates
of a girl who wanted only a little more knowledge and elegance
to be quite perfect.  She would notice her; she would improve her;
she would detach her from her bad acquaintance, and introduce her
into good society; she would form her opinions and her manners. 
It would be an interesting, and certainly a very kind undertaking;
highly becoming her own situation in life, her leisure, and powers. 
She was so busy in admiring those soft blue eyes, in talking
and listening, and forming all these schemes in the in-betweens, that
the evening flew away at a very unusual rate; and the supper-table,
which always closed such parties, and for which she had been
used to sit and watch the due time, was all set out and ready,
and moved forwards to the fire, before she was aware.  With an
alacrity beyond the common impulse of a spirit which yet was never
indifferent to the credit of doing every thing well and attentively,
with the real good-will of a mind delighted with its own ideas,
did she then do all the honours of the meal, and help and recommend
the minced chicken and scalloped oysters, with an urgency which she
knew would be acceptable to the early hours and civil scruples of their guests. 
Upon such occasions poor Mr. Woodhouses feelings were in sad warfare. 
He loved to have the cloth laid, because it had been the fashion
of his youth, but his conviction of suppers being very unwholesome
made him rather sorry to see any thing put on it; and while his
hospitality would have welcomed his visitors to every thing,
his care for their health made him grieve that they would eat. 
Such another small basin of thin gruel as his own was all that
he could, with thorough self-approbation, recommend; though he
might constrain himself, while the ladies were comfortably clearing
"Mrs. Bates, let me propose your venturing on one of these eggs. 
An egg boiled very soft is not unwholesome.  Serle understands boiling
an egg better than any body.  I would not recommend an egg boiled
by any body else; but you need not be afraid, they are very small,
you see--one of our small eggs will not hurt you.  Miss Bates,
let Emma help you to a little bit of tart--a very little bit. 
Ours are all apple-tarts. You need not be afraid of unwholesome
preserves here.  I do not advise the custard.  Mrs. Goddard, what say
you to half a glass of wine? A small half-glass, put into a tumbler
of water? I do not think it could disagree with you."
Emma allowed her father to talk--but supplied her visitors in
a much more satisfactory style, and on the present evening had
particular pleasure in sending them away happy.  The happiness
of Miss Smith was quite equal to her intentions.  Miss Woodhouse
was so great a personage in Highbury, that the prospect of the
introduction had given as much panic as pleasure; but the humble,
grateful little girl went off with highly gratified feelings,
delighted with the affability with which Miss Woodhouse had treated
her all the evening, and actually shaken hands with her at last!
Harriet Smith's intimacy at Hartfield was soon a settled thing. 
Quick and decided in her ways, Emma lost no time in inviting, encouraging,
and telling her to come very often; and as their acquaintance increased,
so did their satisfaction in each other.  As a walking companion,
Emma had very early foreseen how useful she might find her. 
In that respect Mrs. Weston's loss had been important.  Her father
never went beyond the shrubbery, where two divisions of the ground
sufficed him for his long walk, or his short, as the year varied;
and since Mrs. Weston's marriage her exercise had been too much confined. 
She had ventured once alone to Randalls, but it was not pleasant;
and a Harriet Smith, therefore, one whom she could summon at any
time to a walk, would be a valuable addition to her privileges. 
But in every respect, as she saw more of her, she approved her,
Harriet certainly was not clever, but she had a sweet, docile,
grateful disposition, was totally free from conceit, and only desiring
to be guided by any one she looked up to.  Her early attachment
to herself was very amiable; and her inclination for good company,
and power of appreciating what was elegant and clever, shewed that
there was no want of taste, though strength of understanding must
not be expected.  Altogether she was quite convinced of Harriet
Smith's being exactly the young friend she wanted--exactly the
something which her home required.  Such a friend as Mrs. Weston
was out of the question.  Two such could never be granted. 
Two such she did not want.  It was quite a different sort of thing,
a sentiment distinct and independent.  Mrs. Weston was the object
of a regard which had its basis in gratitude and esteem. 
Harriet would be loved as one to whom she could be useful. 
For Mrs. Weston there was nothing to be done; for Harriet every thing. 
Her first attempts at usefulness were in an endeavour to find out who
were the parents, but Harriet could not tell.  She was ready to tell
every thing in her power, but on this subject questions were vain. 
Emma was obliged to fancy what she liked--but she could never
believe that in the same situation she should not have discovered
the truth.  Harriet had no penetration.  She had been satisfied
to hear and believe just what Mrs. Goddard chose to tell her;
Mrs. Goddard, and the teachers, and the girls and the affairs of the
school in general, formed naturally a great part of the conversation--and
but for her acquaintance with the Martins of Abbey-Mill Farm,
it must have been the whole.  But the Martins occupied her thoughts
a good deal; she had spent two very happy months with them,
and now loved to talk of the pleasures of her visit, and describe
the many comforts and wonders of the place.  Emma encouraged her
talkativeness-- amused by such a picture of another set of beings,
and enjoying the youthful simplicity which could speak with so much
exultation of Mrs. Martin's having "two parlours, two very good parlours,
indeed; one of them quite as large as Mrs. Goddard's drawing-room;
and of her having an upper maid who had lived five-and-twenty years
with her; and of their having eight cows, two of them Alderneys,
and one a little Welch cow, a very pretty little Welch cow indeed;
and of Mrs. Martin's saying as she was so fond of it, it should be
called her cow; and of their having a very handsome summer-house
in their garden, where some day next year they were all to drink
tea:-- a very handsome summer-house, large enough to hold a dozen people."
For some time she was amused, without thinking beyond the immediate cause;
but as she came to understand the family better, other feelings arose. 
She had taken up a wrong idea, fancying it was a mother and daughter,
a son and son's wife, who all lived together; but when it appeared
that the Mr. Martin, who bore a part in the narrative, and was always
mentioned with approbation for his great good-nature in doing something
or other, was a single man; that there was no young Mrs. Martin,
no wife in the case; she did suspect danger to her poor little
friend from all this hospitality and kindness, and that, if she
were not taken care of, she might be required to sink herself forever. 
With this inspiriting notion, her questions increased in number
and meaning; and she particularly led Harriet to talk more of Mr. Martin,
and there was evidently no dislike to it.  Harriet was very ready
to speak of the share he had had in their moonlight walks and merry
evening games; and dwelt a good deal upon his being so very good-humoured
and obliging.  He had gone three miles round one day in order to bring
her some walnuts, because she had said how fond she was of them,
and in every thing else he was so very obliging.  He had his
shepherd's son into the parlour one night on purpose to sing to her. 
She was very fond of singing.  He could sing a little himself. 
She believed he was very clever, and understood every thing. 
He had a very fine flock, and, while she was with them,
he had been bid more for his wool than any body in the country. 
She believed every body spoke well of him.  His mother and sisters
were very fond of him.  Mrs. Martin had told her one day (and there
was a blush as she said it,) that it was impossible for any body
to be a better son, and therefore she was sure, whenever he married,
he would make a good husband.  Not that she wanted him to marry. 
"Well done, Mrs. Martin!" thought Emma.  "You know what you are about."
"And when she had come away, Mrs. Martin was so very kind as to send
Mrs. Goddard a beautiful goose--the finest goose Mrs. Goddard had
ever seen.  Mrs. Goddard had dressed it on a Sunday, and asked all
the three teachers, Miss Nash, and Miss Prince, and Miss Richardson,
"Mr. Martin, I suppose, is not a man of information beyond the line
"Oh yes!--that is, no--I do not know--but I believe he has
read a good deal--but not what you would think any thing of. 
He reads the Agricultural Reports, and some other books that lay
in one of the window seats--but he reads all them to himself. 
But sometimes of an evening, before we went to cards, he would read
something aloud out of the Elegant Extracts, very entertaining. 
And I know he has read the Vicar of Wakefield.  He never read the
Romance of the Forest, nor The Children of the Abbey.  He had never
heard of such books before I mentioned them, but he is determined
"Oh! not handsome--not at all handsome.  I thought him very plain
at first, but I do not think him so plain now.  One does not, you know,
after a time.  But did you never see him? He is in Highbury every
now and then, and he is sure to ride through every week in his way
"That may be, and I may have seen him fifty times, but without
having any idea of his name.  A young farmer, whether on horseback
or on foot, is the very last sort of person to raise my curiosity. 
The yeomanry are precisely the order of people with whom I feel I
can have nothing to do.  A degree or two lower, and a creditable
appearance might interest me; I might hope to be useful to their
families in some way or other.  But a farmer can need none of my help,
and is, therefore, in one sense, as much above my notice as in every
"To be sure.  Oh yes! It is not likely you should ever have
observed him; but he knows you very well indeed--I mean by sight."
"I have no doubt of his being a very respectable young man. 
I know, indeed, that he is so, and, as such, wish him well. 
"He was four-and-twenty the 8th of last June, and my birthday is
the 23rd just a fortnight and a day's difference--which is very odd."
"Only four-and-twenty. That is too young to settle.  His mother is
perfectly right not to be in a hurry.  They seem very comfortable
as they are, and if she were to take any pains to marry him,
she would probably repent it.  Six years hence, if he could meet
with a good sort of young woman in the same rank as his own,
"Six years hence! Dear Miss Woodhouse, he would be thirty years old!"
"Well, and that is as early as most men can afford to marry,
who are not born to an independence.  Mr. Martin, I imagine,
has his fortune entirely to make--cannot be at all beforehand with
the world.  Whatever money he might come into when his father died,
whatever his share of the family property, it is, I dare say,
all afloat, all employed in his stock, and so forth; and though,
with diligence and good luck, he may be rich in time, it is next to
impossible that he should have realised any thing yet."
"To be sure, so it is.  But they live very comfortably. 
They have no indoors man, else they do not want for any thing;
and Mrs. Martin talks of taking a boy another year."
"I wish you may not get into a scrape, Harriet, whenever he does
marry;--I mean, as to being acquainted with his wife--for though
his sisters, from a superior education, are not to be altogether
objected to, it does not follow that he might marry any body at all fit
for you to notice.  The misfortune of your birth ought to make you
particularly careful as to your associates.  There can be no doubt
of your being a gentleman's daughter, and you must support your
claim to that station by every thing within your own power, or there
will be plenty of people who would take pleasure in degrading you."
"Yes, to be sure, I suppose there are.  But while I visit
at Hartfield, and you are so kind to me, Miss Woodhouse,
"You understand the force of influence pretty well, Harriet; but I
would have you so firmly established in good society, as to be
independent even of Hartfield and Miss Woodhouse.  I want to see you
permanently well connected, and to that end it will be advisable
to have as few odd acquaintance as may be; and, therefore, I say
that if you should still be in this country when Mr. Martin marries,
I wish you may not be drawn in by your intimacy with the sisters,
to be acquainted with the wife, who will probably be some mere
"To be sure.  Yes.  Not that I think Mr. Martin would ever marry any body
but what had had some education--and been very well brought up. 
However, I do not mean to set up my opinion against your's--and I
am sure I shall not wish for the acquaintance of his wife.  I shall
always have a great regard for the Miss Martins, especially Elizabeth,
and should be very sorry to give them up, for they are quite as well
educated as me.  But if he marries a very ignorant, vulgar woman,
certainly I had better not visit her, if I can help it."
Emma watched her through the fluctuations of this speech,
and saw no alarming symptoms of love.  The young man had been
the first admirer, but she trusted there was no other hold,
and that there would be no serious difficulty, on Harriet's side,
They met Mr. Martin the very next day, as they were walking on the
Donwell road.  He was on foot, and after looking very respectfully
at her, looked with most unfeigned satisfaction at her companion. 
Emma was not sorry to have such an opportunity of survey;
and walking a few yards forward, while they talked together, soon made
her quick eye sufficiently acquainted with Mr. Robert Martin. 
His appearance was very neat, and he looked like a sensible young man,
but his person had no other advantage; and when he came to be
contrasted with gentlemen, she thought he must lose all the ground
he had gained in Harriet's inclination.  Harriet was not insensible
of manner; she had voluntarily noticed her father's gentleness
with admiration as well as wonder.  Mr. Martin looked as if he
They remained but a few minutes together, as Miss Woodhouse must
not be kept waiting; and Harriet then came running to her with a
smiling face, and in a flutter of spirits, which Miss Woodhouse
"Only think of our happening to meet him!--How very odd! It was
quite a chance, he said, that he had not gone round by Randalls. 
He did not think we ever walked this road.  He thought we walked
towards Randalls most days.  He has not been able to get the
Romance of the Forest yet.  He was so busy the last time he was
at Kingston that he quite forgot it, but he goes again to-morrow. 
So very odd we should happen to meet! Well, Miss Woodhouse, is he
like what you expected? What do you think of him? Do you think him
"He is very plain, undoubtedly--remarkably plain:--but that is
nothing compared with his entire want of gentility.  I had no
right to expect much, and I did not expect much; but I had no
idea that he could be so very clownish, so totally without air. 
I had imagined him, I confess, a degree or two nearer gentility."
"To be sure," said Harriet, in a mortified voice, "he is not
"I think, Harriet, since your acquaintance with us, you have been
repeatedly in the company of some such very real gentlemen,
that you must yourself be struck with the difference in Mr. Martin. 
At Hartfield, you have had very good specimens of well educated,
well bred men.  I should be surprized if, after seeing them,
you could be in company with Mr. Martin again without perceiving
him to be a very inferior creature--and rather wondering at
yourself for having ever thought him at all agreeable before. 
Do not you begin to feel that now? Were not you struck? I am sure
you must have been struck by his awkward look and abrupt manner,
and the uncouthness of a voice which I heard to be wholly unmodulated
"Certainly, he is not like Mr. Knightley.  He has not such a fine
air and way of walking as Mr. Knightley.  I see the difference
plain enough.  But Mr. Knightley is so very fine a man!"
"Mr. Knightley's air is so remarkably good that it is not fair
to compare Mr. Martin with him.  You might not see one in a hundred
with gentleman so plainly written as in Mr. Knightley.  But he is
not the only gentleman you have been lately used to.  What say you
to Mr. Weston and Mr. Elton? Compare Mr. Martin with either of them. 
Compare their manner of carrying themselves; of walking; of speaking;
"Oh yes!--there is a great difference.  But Mr. Weston is almost
an old man.  Mr. Weston must be between forty and fifty."
"Which makes his good manners the more valuable.  The older a
person grows, Harriet, the more important it is that their manners
should not be bad; the more glaring and disgusting any loudness,
or coarseness, or awkwardness becomes.  What is passable in youth
is detestable in later age.  Mr. Martin is now awkward and abrupt;
"There is no saying, indeed," replied Harriet rather solemnly. 
"But there may be pretty good guessing.  He will be a completely gross,
vulgar farmer, totally inattentive to appearances, and thinking
"How much his business engrosses him already is very plain from the
circumstance of his forgetting to inquire for the book you recommended. 
He was a great deal too full of the market to think of any thing
else--which is just as it should be, for a thriving man.  What has
he to do with books? And I have no doubt that he will thrive,
and be a very rich man in time--and his being illiterate and coarse
"I wonder he did not remember the book"--was all Harriet's answer,
and spoken with a degree of grave displeasure which Emma thought might
be safely left to itself.  She, therefore, said no more for some time. 
"In one respect, perhaps, Mr. Elton's manners are superior
to Mr. Knightley's or Mr. Weston's. They have more gentleness. 
They might be more safely held up as a pattern.  There is an openness,
a quickness, almost a bluntness in Mr. Weston, which every body
likes in him, because there is so much good-humour with it--but
that would not do to be copied.  Neither would Mr. Knightley's
downright, decided, commanding sort of manner, though it suits
him very well; his figure, and look, and situation in life seem
to allow it; but if any young man were to set about copying him,
he would not be sufferable.  On the contrary, I think a young man
might be very safely recommended to take Mr. Elton as a model. 
Mr. Elton is good-humoured, cheerful, obliging, and gentle. 
He seems to me to be grown particularly gentle of late.  I do not
know whether he has any design of ingratiating himself with either
of us, Harriet, by additional softness, but it strikes me that his
manners are softer than they used to be.  If he means any thing,
it must be to please you.  Did not I tell you what he said of you
She then repeated some warm personal praise which she had drawn
from Mr. Elton, and now did full justice to; and Harriet blushed
and smiled, and said she had always thought Mr. Elton very agreeable. 
Mr. Elton was the very person fixed on by Emma for driving
the young farmer out of Harriet's head.  She thought it would
be an excellent match; and only too palpably desirable, natural,
and probable, for her to have much merit in planning it. 
She feared it was what every body else must think of and predict. 
It was not likely, however, that any body should have equalled
her in the date of the plan, as it had entered her brain during
the very first evening of Harriet's coming to Hartfield.  The longer
she considered it, the greater was her sense of its expediency. 
Mr. Elton's situation was most suitable, quite the gentleman himself,
and without low connexions; at the same time, not of any family
that could fairly object to the doubtful birth of Harriet.  He had a
comfortable home for her, and Emma imagined a very sufficient income;
for though the vicarage of Highbury was not large, he was known
to have some independent property; and she thought very highly
of him as a good-humoured, well-meaning, respectable young man,
without any deficiency of useful understanding or knowledge of the world. 
She had already satisfied herself that he thought Harriet a beautiful
girl, which she trusted, with such frequent meetings at Hartfield,
was foundation enough on his side; and on Harriet's there could be
little doubt that the idea of being preferred by him would have all
the usual weight and efficacy.  And he was really a very pleasing
young man, a young man whom any woman not fastidious might like. 
He was reckoned very handsome; his person much admired in general,
though not by her, there being a want of elegance of feature which
she could not dispense with:--but the girl who could be gratified
by a Robert Martin's riding about the country to get walnuts
for her might very well be conquered by Mr. Elton's admiration. 
"I do not know what your opinion may be, Mrs. Weston," said Mr. Knightley, "of
this great intimacy between Emma and Harriet Smith, but I think it a bad thing."
"A bad thing! Do you really think it a bad thing?-- why so?"
"I think they will neither of them do the other any good."
"You surprize me! Emma must do Harriet good: and by supplying her
with a new object of interest, Harriet may be said to do Emma good. 
I have been seeing their intimacy with the greatest pleasure. 
How very differently we feel!--Not think they will do each other any
good! This will certainly be the beginning of one of our quarrels
"Perhaps you think I am come on purpose to quarrel with you,
knowing Weston to be out, and that you must still fight your own battle."
"Mr. Weston would undoubtedly support me, if he were here,
for he thinks exactly as I do on the subject.  We were speaking
of it only yesterday, and agreeing how fortunate it was for Emma,
that there should be such a girl in Highbury for her to associate with. 
Mr. Knightley, I shall not allow you to be a fair judge in this case. 
You are so much used to live alone, that you do not know the value
of a companion; and, perhaps no man can be a good judge of the comfort
a woman feels in the society of one of her own sex, after being used
to it all her life.  I can imagine your objection to Harriet Smith. 
She is not the superior young woman which Emma's friend ought to be. 
But on the other hand, as Emma wants to see her better informed,
it will be an inducement to her to read more herself.  They will
"Emma has been meaning to read more ever since she was twelve
years old.  I have seen a great many lists of her drawing-up at
various times of books that she meant to read regularly through--and
very good lists they were--very well chosen, and very neatly
arranged--sometimes alphabetically, and sometimes by some other rule. 
The list she drew up when only fourteen--I remember thinking it
did her judgment so much credit, that I preserved it some time;
and I dare say she may have made out a very good list now.  But I
have done with expecting any course of steady reading from Emma. 
She will never submit to any thing requiring industry and patience,
and a subjection of the fancy to the understanding.  Where Miss Taylor
failed to stimulate, I may safely affirm that Harriet Smith will do
nothing.-- You never could persuade her to read half so much as you
"I dare say," replied Mrs. Weston, smiling, "that I thought
so then;--but since we have parted, I can never remember Emma's
"There is hardly any desiring to refresh such a memory as that,"--said
Mr. Knightley, feelingly; and for a moment or two he had done.  "But I,"
he soon added, "who have had no such charm thrown over my senses,
must still see, hear, and remember.  Emma is spoiled by being the
cleverest of her family.  At ten years old, she had the misfortune of
being able to answer questions which puzzled her sister at seventeen. 
She was always quick and assured: Isabella slow and diffident. 
And ever since she was twelve, Emma has been mistress of the house
and of you all.  In her mother she lost the only person able to cope
with her.  She inherits her mother's talents, and must have been
"I should have been sorry, Mr. Knightley, to be dependent on
your recommendation, had I quitted Mr. Woodhouse's family and wanted
another situation; I do not think you would have spoken a good word for
me to any body.  I am sure you always thought me unfit for the office I held."
"Yes," said he, smiling.  "You are better placed here; very fit
for a wife, but not at all for a governess.  But you were preparing
yourself to be an excellent wife all the time you were at Hartfield. 
You might not give Emma such a complete education as your powers would
seem to promise; but you were receiving a very good education from her,
on the very material matrimonial point of submitting your own will,
and doing as you were bid; and if Weston had asked me to recommend
him a wife, I should certainly have named Miss Taylor."
"Thank you.  There will be very little merit in making a good wife
"Why, to own the truth, I am afraid you are rather thrown away,
and that with every disposition to bear, there will be nothing
to be borne.  We will not despair, however.  Weston may grow cross
from the wantonness of comfort, or his son may plague him."
"I hope not that.--It is not likely.  No, Mr. Knightley, do not
"Not I, indeed.  I only name possibilities.  I do not pretend to Emma's
genius for foretelling and guessing.  I hope, with all my heart,
the young man may be a Weston in merit, and a Churchill in fortune.--But
Harriet Smith--I have not half done about Harriet Smith.  I think
her the very worst sort of companion that Emma could possibly have. 
She knows nothing herself, and looks upon Emma as knowing every thing. 
She is a flatterer in all her ways; and so much the worse,
because undesigned.  Her ignorance is hourly flattery.  How can
Emma imagine she has any thing to learn herself, while Harriet
is presenting such a delightful inferiority? And as for Harriet,
I will venture to say that she cannot gain by the acquaintance. 
Hartfield will only put her out of conceit with all the other places
she belongs to.  She will grow just refined enough to be uncomfortable
with those among whom birth and circumstances have placed her home. 
I am much mistaken if Emma's doctrines give any strength of mind,
or tend at all to make a girl adapt herself rationally to the varieties
of her situation in life.--They only give a little polish."
"I either depend more upon Emma's good sense than you do, or am more
anxious for her present comfort; for I cannot lament the acquaintance. 
"Oh! you would rather talk of her person than her mind, would you?
Very well; I shall not attempt to deny Emma's being pretty."
"Pretty! say beautiful rather.  Can you imagine any thing nearer
perfect beauty than Emma altogether-- face and figure?"
"I do not know what I could imagine, but I confess that I have
seldom seen a face or figure more pleasing to me than hers. 
"Such an eye!--the true hazle eye--and so brilliant! regular features,
open countenance, with a complexion! oh! what a bloom of full health,
and such a pretty height and size; such a firm and upright figure!
There is health, not merely in her bloom, but in her air, her head,
her glance.  One hears sometimes of a child being `the picture
of health;' now, Emma always gives me the idea of being the complete
picture of grown-up health.  She is loveliness itself.  Mr. Knightley,
"I have not a fault to find with her person," he replied. 
"I think her all you describe.  I love to look at her; and I
will add this praise, that I do not think her personally vain. 
Considering how very handsome she is, she appears to be little
occupied with it; her vanity lies another way.  Mrs. Weston, I am
not to be talked out of my dislike of Harriet Smith, or my dread
"And I, Mr. Knightley, am equally stout in my confidence of its
not doing them any harm.  With all dear Emma's little faults,
she is an excellent creature.  Where shall we see a better daughter,
or a kinder sister, or a truer friend? No, no; she has qualities
which may be trusted; she will never lead any one really wrong;
she will make no lasting blunder; where Emma errs once, she is in the
"Very well; I will not plague you any more.  Emma shall be an angel,
and I will keep my spleen to myself till Christmas brings John
and Isabella.  John loves Emma with a reasonable and therefore
not a blind affection, and Isabella always thinks as he does;
except when he is not quite frightened enough about the children. 
"I know that you all love her really too well to be unjust or unkind;
but excuse me, Mr. Knightley, if I take the liberty (I consider myself,
you know, as having somewhat of the privilege of speech that Emma's
mother might have had) the liberty of hinting that I do not think
any possible good can arise from Harriet Smith's intimacy being made
a matter of much discussion among you.  Pray excuse me; but supposing
any little inconvenience may be apprehended from the intimacy,
it cannot be expected that Emma, accountable to nobody but her father,
who perfectly approves the acquaintance, should put an end to it,
so long as it is a source of pleasure to herself.  It has been so
many years my province to give advice, that you cannot be surprized,
"Not at all," cried he; "I am much obliged to you for it. 
It is very good advice, and it shall have a better fate than your
advice has often found; for it shall be attended to."
"Mrs. John Knightley is easily alarmed, and might be made unhappy
"Be satisfied," said he, "I will not raise any outcry.  I will keep
my ill-humour to myself.  I have a very sincere interest in Emma. 
Isabella does not seem more my sister; has never excited a
greater interest; perhaps hardly so great.  There is an anxiety,
a curiosity in what one feels for Emma.  I wonder what will become
"She always declares she will never marry, which, of course,
means just nothing at all.  But I have no idea that she has yet
ever seen a man she cared for.  It would not be a bad thing for her
to be very much in love with a proper object.  I should like to see
Emma in love, and in some doubt of a return; it would do her good. 
But there is nobody hereabouts to attach her; and she goes so seldom
"There does, indeed, seem as little to tempt her to break
her resolution at present," said Mrs. Weston, "as can well be;
and while she is so happy at Hartfield, I cannot wish her to be
forming any attachment which would be creating such difficulties
on poor Mr. Woodhouse's account.  I do not recommend matrimony
at present to Emma, though I mean no slight to the state, I assure you."
Part of her meaning was to conceal some favourite thoughts of
her own and Mr. Weston's on the subject, as much as possible. 
There were wishes at Randalls respecting Emma's destiny, but it
was not desirable to have them suspected; and the quiet transition
which Mr. Knightley soon afterwards made to "What does Weston
think of the weather; shall we have rain?" convinced her that he
had nothing more to say or surmise about Hartfield. 
Emma could not feel a doubt of having given Harriet's fancy
a proper direction and raised the gratitude of her young vanity
to a very good purpose, for she found her decidedly more sensible
than before of Mr. Elton's being a remarkably handsome man, with most
agreeable manners; and as she had no hesitation in following up
the assurance of his admiration by agreeable hints, she was soon
pretty confident of creating as much liking on Harriet's side,
as there could be any occasion for.  She was quite convinced
of Mr. Elton's being in the fairest way of falling in love,
if not in love already.  She had no scruple with regard to him. 
He talked of Harriet, and praised her so warmly, that she could
not suppose any thing wanting which a little time would not add. 
His perception of the striking improvement of Harriet's manner,
since her introduction at Hartfield, was not one of the least
"You have given Miss Smith all that she required," said he;
"you have made her graceful and easy.  She was a beautiful creature
when she came to you, but, in my opinion, the attractions you have
added are infinitely superior to what she received from nature."
"I am glad you think I have been useful to her; but Harriet
only wanted drawing out, and receiving a few, very few hints. 
She had all the natural grace of sweetness of temper and artlessness
"If it were admissible to contradict a lady," said the gallant
"I have perhaps given her a little more decision of character,
have taught her to think on points which had not fallen in her
"Exactly so; that is what principally strikes me.  So much superadded
decision of character! Skilful has been the hand!"
"Great has been the pleasure, I am sure.  I never met with
"I have no doubt of it." And it was spoken with a sort
of sighing animation, which had a vast deal of the lover. 
She was not less pleased another day with the manner
in which he seconded a sudden wish of hers, to have Harriet's picture. 
"Did you ever have your likeness taken, Harriet?" said she: "did
Harriet was on the point of leaving the room, and only stopt to say,
No sooner was she out of sight, than Emma exclaimed,
"What an exquisite possession a good picture of her would be! I would
give any money for it.  I almost long to attempt her likeness myself. 
You do not know it I dare say, but two or three years ago I had
a great passion for taking likenesses, and attempted several of
my friends, and was thought to have a tolerable eye in general. 
But from one cause or another, I gave it up in disgust. 
But really, I could almost venture, if Harriet would sit to me. 
"Let me entreat you," cried Mr. Elton; "it would indeed be a delight!
Let me entreat you, Miss Woodhouse, to exercise so charming a
talent in favour of your friend.  I know what your drawings are. 
How could you suppose me ignorant? Is not this room rich in
specimens of your landscapes and flowers; and has not Mrs. Weston
some inimitable figure-pieces in her drawing-room, at Randalls?"
Yes, good man!--thought Emma--but what has all that to do with taking
likenesses? You know nothing of drawing.  Don't pretend to be
in raptures about mine.  Keep your raptures for Harriet's face. 
"Well, if you give me such kind encouragement, Mr. Elton, I believe
I shall try what I can do.  Harriet's features are very delicate,
which makes a likeness difficult; and yet there is a peculiarity
in the shape of the eye and the lines about the mouth which one ought
"Exactly so--The shape of the eye and the lines about the mouth--I
have not a doubt of your success.  Pray, pray attempt it. 
As you will do it, it will indeed, to use your own words,
"But I am afraid, Mr. Elton, Harriet will not like to sit. 
She thinks so little of her own beauty.  Did not you observe her
manner of answering me? How completely it meant, `why should my
"Oh! yes, I observed it, I assure you.  It was not lost on me. 
But still I cannot imagine she would not be persuaded."
Harriet was soon back again, and the proposal almost immediately made;
and she had no scruples which could stand many minutes against the earnest
pressing of both the others.  Emma wished to go to work directly,
and therefore produced the portfolio containing her various attempts
at portraits, for not one of them had ever been finished, that they
might decide together on the best size for Harriet.  Her many
beginnings were displayed.  Miniatures, half-lengths, whole-lengths,
pencil, crayon, and water-colours had been all tried in turn. 
She had always wanted to do every thing, and had made more progress
both in drawing and music than many might have done with so little
labour as she would ever submit to.  She played and sang;--and drew
in almost every style; but steadiness had always been wanting;
and in nothing had she approached the degree of excellence which she
would have been glad to command, and ought not to have failed of. 
She was not much deceived as to her own skill either as an artist
or a musician, but she was not unwilling to have others deceived,
or sorry to know her reputation for accomplishment often higher
There was merit in every drawing--in the least finished, perhaps the most;
her style was spirited; but had there been much less, or had there
been ten times more, the delight and admiration of her two companions
would have been the same.  They were both in ecstasies.  A likeness
pleases every body; and Miss Woodhouse's performances must be capital. 
"No great variety of faces for you," said Emma.  "I had only my
own family to study from.  There is my father--another of my
father--but the idea of sitting for his picture made him so nervous,
that I could only take him by stealth; neither of them very
like therefore.  Mrs. Weston again, and again, and again, you see. 
Dear Mrs. Weston! always my kindest friend on every occasion. 
She would sit whenever I asked her.  There is my sister; and really
quite her own little elegant figure!--and the face not unlike. 
I should have made a good likeness of her, if she would have
sat longer, but she was in such a hurry to have me draw her four
children that she would not be quiet.  Then, here come all my
attempts at three of those four children;--there they are,
Henry and John and Bella, from one end of the sheet to the other,
and any one of them might do for any one of the rest.  She was so
eager to have them drawn that I could not refuse; but there is no
making children of three or four years old stand still you know;
nor can it be very easy to take any likeness of them, beyond the
air and complexion, unless they are coarser featured than any
of mama's children ever were.  Here is my sketch of the fourth,
who was a baby.  I took him as he was sleeping on the sofa, and it
is as strong a likeness of his cockade as you would wish to see. 
He had nestled down his head most conveniently.  That's very like. 
I am rather proud of little George.  The corner of the sofa is very good. 
Then here is my last,"--unclosing a pretty sketch of a gentleman
in small size, whole-length-- "my last and my best--my brother,
Mr. John Knightley.  --This did not want much of being finished, when I
put it away in a pet, and vowed I would never take another likeness. 
I could not help being provoked; for after all my pains, and when I
had really made a very good likeness of it--(Mrs. Weston and I
were quite agreed in thinking it very like)--only too handsome--too
flattering--but that was a fault on the right side-- after
all this, came poor dear Isabella's cold approbation of--"Yes,
it was a little like--but to be sure it did not do him justice."
We had had a great deal of trouble in persuading him to sit at all. 
It was made a great favour of; and altogether it was more than I
could bear; and so I never would finish it, to have it apologised
over as an unfavourable likeness, to every morning visitor in
Brunswick Square;--and, as I said, I did then forswear ever drawing
any body again.  But for Harriet's sake, or rather for my own,
and as there are no husbands and wives in the case at present,
Mr. Elton seemed very properly struck and delighted by the idea,
and was repeating, "No husbands and wives in the case at present
indeed, as you observe.  Exactly so.  No husbands and wives,"
with so interesting a consciousness, that Emma began to consider
whether she had not better leave them together at once.  But as she
wanted to be drawing, the declaration must wait a little longer. 
She had soon fixed on the size and sort of portrait. 
It was to be a whole-length in water-colours, like Mr. John
Knightley's, and was destined, if she could please herself,
to hold a very honourable station over the mantelpiece. 
The sitting began; and Harriet, smiling and blushing, and afraid
of not keeping her attitude and countenance, presented a very sweet
mixture of youthful expression to the steady eyes of the artist. 
But there was no doing any thing, with Mr. Elton fidgeting behind
her and watching every touch.  She gave him credit for stationing
himself where he might gaze and gaze again without offence;
but was really obliged to put an end to it, and request him to
place himself elsewhere.  It then occurred to her to employ him
"If he would be so good as to read to them, it would be a kindness
indeed! It would amuse away the difficulties of her part, and lessen
Mr. Elton was only too happy.  Harriet listened, and Emma drew
in peace.  She must allow him to be still frequently coming to look;
any thing less would certainly have been too little in a lover;
and he was ready at the smallest intermission of the pencil,
to jump up and see the progress, and be charmed.--There was no
being displeased with such an encourager, for his admiration
made him discern a likeness almost before it was possible. 
She could not respect his eye, but his love and his complaisance
The sitting was altogether very satisfactory; she was quite
enough pleased with the first day's sketch to wish to go on. 
There was no want of likeness, she had been fortunate in the attitude,
and as she meant to throw in a little improvement to the figure,
to give a little more height, and considerably more elegance, she had
great confidence of its being in every way a pretty drawing at last,
and of its filling its destined place with credit to them both--a
standing memorial of the beauty of one, the skill of the other,
and the friendship of both; with as many other agreeable associations
as Mr. Elton's very promising attachment was likely to add. 
Harriet was to sit again the next day; and Mr. Elton, just as he ought,
entreated for the permission of attending and reading to them again. 
"By all means.  We shall be most happy to consider you as one
The same civilities and courtesies, the same success and satisfaction,
took place on the morrow, and accompanied the whole progress
of the picture, which was rapid and happy.  Every body who saw it
was pleased, but Mr. Elton was in continual raptures, and defended
"Miss Woodhouse has given her friend the only beauty she
wanted,"--observed Mrs. Weston to him--not in the least suspecting
that she was addressing a lover.--"The expression of the eye is
most correct, but Miss Smith has not those eyebrows and eyelashes. 
It is the fault of her face that she has them not."
"Do you think so?" replied he.  "I cannot agree with you. 
It appears to me a most perfect resemblance in every feature. 
I never saw such a likeness in my life.  We must allow for the effect
"You have made her too tall, Emma," said Mr. Knightley. 
Emma knew that she had, but would not own it; and Mr. Elton warmly added,
"Oh no! certainly not too tall; not in the least too tall.  Consider,
she is sitting down--which naturally presents a different--which
in short gives exactly the idea--and the proportions must
be preserved, you know.  Proportions, fore-shortening.--Oh no! it
gives one exactly the idea of such a height as Miss Smith's. Exactly so indeed!"
"It is very pretty," said Mr. Woodhouse.  "So prettily done! Just
as your drawings always are, my dear.  I do not know any body who draws
so well as you do.  The only thing I do not thoroughly like is,
that she seems to be sitting out of doors, with only a little shawl
over her shoulders--and it makes one think she must catch cold."
"But, my dear papa, it is supposed to be summer; a warm day in summer. 
"But it is never safe to sit out of doors, my dear."
"You, sir, may say any thing," cried Mr. Elton, "but I must confess
that I regard it as a most happy thought, the placing of Miss
Smith out of doors; and the tree is touched with such inimitable
spirit! Any other situation would have been much less in character. 
The naivete of Miss Smith's manners--and altogether--Oh, it is
most admirable! I cannot keep my eyes from it.  I never saw such
The next thing wanted was to get the picture framed; and here were a
few difficulties.  It must be done directly; it must be done in London;
the order must go through the hands of some intelligent person whose taste
could be depended on; and Isabella, the usual doer of all commissions,
must not be applied to, because it was December, and Mr. Woodhouse
could not bear the idea of her stirring out of her house in the fogs
of December.  But no sooner was the distress known to Mr. Elton,
than it was removed.  His gallantry was always on the alert. 
"Might he be trusted with the commission, what infinite pleasure
should he have in executing it! he could ride to London at any time. 
It was impossible to say how much he should be gratified by being
"He was too good!--she could not endure the thought!-- she would
not give him such a troublesome office for the world,"--brought
on the desired repetition of entreaties and assurances,--and
Mr. Elton was to take the drawing to London, chuse the frame,
and give the directions; and Emma thought she could so pack it
as to ensure its safety without much incommoding him, while he
seemed mostly fearful of not being incommoded enough. 
"What a precious deposit!" said he with a tender sigh, as he
"This man is almost too gallant to be in love," thought Emma. 
"I should say so, but that I suppose there may be a hundred different
ways of being in love.  He is an excellent young man, and will suit
Harriet exactly; it will be an `Exactly so,' as he says himself;
but he does sigh and languish, and study for compliments rather more
than I could endure as a principal.  I come in for a pretty good
share as a second.  But it is his gratitude on Harriet's account."
The very day of Mr. Elton's going to London produced a fresh occasion
for Emma's services towards her friend.  Harriet had been at Hartfield,
as usual, soon after breakfast; and, after a time, had gone home
to return again to dinner: she returned, and sooner than had been
talked of, and with an agitated, hurried look, announcing something
extraordinary to have happened which she was longing to tell. 
Half a minute brought it all out.  She had heard, as soon as she got
back to Mrs. Goddard's, that Mr. Martin had been there an hour before,
and finding she was not at home, nor particularly expected, had left
a little parcel for her from one of his sisters, and gone away;
and on opening this parcel, she had actually found, besides the two
songs which she had lent Elizabeth to copy, a letter to herself;
and this letter was from him, from Mr. Martin, and contained a direct
proposal of marriage.  "Who could have thought it? She was so surprized
she did not know what to do.  Yes, quite a proposal of marriage;
and a very good letter, at least she thought so.  And he wrote
as if he really loved her very much--but she did not know--and so,
she was come as fast as she could to ask Miss Woodhouse what she
should do.--" Emma was half-ashamed of her friend for seeming so
"Upon my word," she cried, "the young man is determined not to lose
any thing for want of asking.  He will connect himself well if he can."
"Will you read the letter?" cried Harriet.  "Pray do.  I'd rather
Emma was not sorry to be pressed.  She read, and was surprized. 
The style of the letter was much above her expectation. 
There were not merely no grammatical errors, but as a composition it
would not have disgraced a gentleman; the language, though plain,
was strong and unaffected, and the sentiments it conveyed very much
to the credit of the writer.  It was short, but expressed good sense,
warm attachment, liberality, propriety, even delicacy of feeling. 
She paused over it, while Harriet stood anxiously watching for
her opinion, with a "Well, well," and was at last forced to add,
"Yes, indeed, a very good letter," replied Emma rather slowly--"so
good a letter, Harriet, that every thing considered, I think one of
his sisters must have helped him.  I can hardly imagine the young
man whom I saw talking with you the other day could express himself
so well, if left quite to his own powers, and yet it is not the
style of a woman; no, certainly, it is too strong and concise;
not diffuse enough for a woman.  No doubt he is a sensible man,
and I suppose may have a natural talent for--thinks strongly and
clearly--and when he takes a pen in hand, his thoughts naturally find
proper words.  It is so with some men.  Yes, I understand the sort
of mind.  Vigorous, decided, with sentiments to a certain point,
not coarse.  A better written letter, Harriet (returning it,)
"Well," said the still waiting Harriet;--" well--and-- and what
"What shall you do! In what respect? Do you mean with regard
"But what are you in doubt of? You must answer it of course--and speedily."
"Yes. But what shall I say? Dear Miss Woodhouse, do advise me."
"Oh no, no! the letter had much better be all your own.  You will
express yourself very properly, I am sure.  There is no danger of your
not being intelligible, which is the first thing.  Your meaning must
be unequivocal; no doubts or demurs: and such expressions of gratitude
and concern for the pain you are inflicting as propriety requires,
will present themselves unbidden to your mind, I am persuaded. 
You need not be prompted to write with the appearance of sorrow
"You think I ought to refuse him then," said Harriet, looking down. 
"Ought to refuse him! My dear Harriet, what do you mean? Are you
in any doubt as to that? I thought--but I beg your pardon, perhaps I
have been under a mistake.  I certainly have been misunderstanding
you, if you feel in doubt as to the purport of your answer. 
I had imagined you were consulting me only as to the wording of it."
Harriet was silent.  With a little reserve of manner, Emma continued:
"You mean to return a favourable answer, I collect."
"No, I do not; that is, I do not mean--What shall I do? What would
you advise me to do? Pray, dear Miss Woodhouse, tell me what I
"I shall not give you any advice, Harriet.  I will have nothing to
do with it.  This is a point which you must settle with your feelings."
"I had no notion that he liked me so very much," said Harriet,
contemplating the letter.  For a little while Emma persevered
in her silence; but beginning to apprehend the bewitching flattery
of that letter might be too powerful, she thought it best to say,
"I lay it down as a general rule, Harriet, that if a woman doubts
as to whether she should accept a man or not, she certainly ought
to refuse him.  If she can hesitate as to `Yes,' she ought to say
`No' directly.  It is not a state to be safely entered into
with doubtful feelings, with half a heart.  I thought it my duty
as a friend, and older than yourself, to say thus much to you. 
"Oh! no, I am sure you are a great deal too kind to--but if you
would just advise me what I had best do--No, no, I do not mean
that--As you say, one's mind ought to be quite made up--One should
not be hesitating--It is a very serious thing.--It will be safer
to say `No,' perhaps.--Do you think I had better say `No?'"
"Not for the world," said Emma, smiling graciously, "would I advise
you either way.  You must be the best judge of your own happiness. 
If you prefer Mr. Martin to every other person; if you think him
the most agreeable man you have ever been in company with, why should
you hesitate? You blush, Harriet.--Does any body else occur to you
at this moment under such a definition? Harriet, Harriet, do not
deceive yourself; do not be run away with by gratitude and compassion. 
The symptoms were favourable.--Instead of answering, Harriet turned
away confused, and stood thoughtfully by the fire; and though
the letter was still in her hand, it was now mechanically twisted
about without regard.  Emma waited the result with impatience,
but not without strong hopes.  At last, with some hesitation,
"Miss Woodhouse, as you will not give me your opinion, I must
do as well as I can by myself; and I have now quite determined,
and really almost made up my mind--to refuse Mr. Martin.  Do you
"Perfectly, perfectly right, my dearest Harriet; you are doing just
what you ought.  While you were at all in suspense I kept my feelings
to myself, but now that you are so completely decided I have no
hesitation in approving.  Dear Harriet, I give myself joy of this. 
It would have grieved me to lose your acquaintance, which must have
been the consequence of your marrying Mr. Martin.  While you were in
the smallest degree wavering, I said nothing about it, because I would
not influence; but it would have been the loss of a friend to me. 
I could not have visited Mrs. Robert Martin, of Abbey-Mill Farm. 
Harriet had not surmised her own danger, but the idea of it struck
"You could not have visited me!" she cried, looking aghast. 
"No, to be sure you could not; but I never thought of that before. 
That would have been too dreadful!--What an escape!--Dear Miss Woodhouse,
I would not give up the pleasure and honour of being intimate with you
"Indeed, Harriet, it would have been a severe pang to lose you;
but it must have been.  You would have thrown yourself out of all
"Dear me!--How should I ever have borne it! It would have killed
"Dear affectionate creature!--You banished to Abbey-Mill Farm!--You
confined to the society of the illiterate and vulgar all your life!
I wonder how the young man could have the assurance to ask it. 
"I do not think he is conceited either, in general," said Harriet,
her conscience opposing such censure; "at least, he is very good natured,
and I shall always feel much obliged to him, and have a great regard
for-- but that is quite a different thing from--and you know,
though he may like me, it does not follow that I should--and
certainly I must confess that since my visiting here I have seen
people--and if one comes to compare them, person and manners,
there is no comparison at all, one is so very handsome and agreeable. 
However, I do really think Mr. Martin a very amiable young man,
and have a great opinion of him; and his being so much attached
to me--and his writing such a letter--but as to leaving you,
it is what I would not do upon any consideration."
"Thank you, thank you, my own sweet little friend.  We will not
be parted.  A woman is not to marry a man merely because she is asked,
or because he is attached to her, and can write a tolerable letter."
Emma felt the bad taste of her friend, but let it pass with a
"very true; and it would be a small consolation to her, for the
clownish manner which might be offending her every hour of the day,
to know that her husband could write a good letter."
"Oh! yes, very.  Nobody cares for a letter; the thing is, to be always
happy with pleasant companions.  I am quite determined to refuse him. 
Emma assured her there would be no difficulty in the answer,
and advised its being written directly, which was agreed to,
in the hope of her assistance; and though Emma continued to protest
against any assistance being wanted, it was in fact given in the
formation of every sentence.  The looking over his letter again,
in replying to it, had such a softening tendency, that it was
particularly necessary to brace her up with a few decisive expressions;
and she was so very much concerned at the idea of making him unhappy,
and thought so much of what his mother and sisters would think and say,
and was so anxious that they should not fancy her ungrateful,
that Emma believed if the young man had come in her way at that moment,
This letter, however, was written, and sealed, and sent. 
The business was finished, and Harriet safe.  She was rather low
all the evening, but Emma could allow for her amiable regrets,
and sometimes relieved them by speaking of her own affection,
sometimes by bringing forward the idea of Mr. Elton. 
"I shall never be invited to Abbey-Mill again," was said in rather
"Nor, if you were, could I ever bear to part with you, my Harriet. 
You are a great deal too necessary at Hartfield to be spared
"And I am sure I should never want to go there; for I am never happy
Some time afterwards it was, "I think Mrs. Goddard would be very
much surprized if she knew what had happened.  I am sure Miss Nash
would--for Miss Nash thinks her own sister very well married,
"One should be sorry to see greater pride or refinement in the
teacher of a school, Harriet.  I dare say Miss Nash would envy you
such an opportunity as this of being married.  Even this conquest
would appear valuable in her eyes.  As to any thing superior for you,
I suppose she is quite in the dark.  The attentions of a certain
person can hardly be among the tittle-tattle of Highbury yet. 
Hitherto I fancy you and I are the only people to whom his looks
Harriet blushed and smiled, and said something about wondering
that people should like her so much.  The idea of Mr. Elton was
certainly cheering; but still, after a time, she was tender-hearted
"Now he has got my letter," said she softly.  "I wonder what they
are all doing--whether his sisters know--if he is unhappy,
they will be unhappy too.  I hope he will not mind it so very much."
"Let us think of those among our absent friends who are more
cheerfully employed," cried Emma.  "At this moment, perhaps, Mr. Elton
is shewing your picture to his mother and sisters, telling how much
more beautiful is the original, and after being asked for it five
or six times, allowing them to hear your name, your own dear name."
"My picture!--But he has left my picture in Bond-street."
"Has he so!--Then I know nothing of Mr. Elton.  No, my dear
little modest Harriet, depend upon it the picture will not be
in Bond-street till just before he mounts his horse to-morrow.
It is his companion all this evening, his solace, his delight. 
It opens his designs to his family, it introduces you among them,
it diffuses through the party those pleasantest feelings of our nature,
eager curiosity and warm prepossession.  How cheerful, how animated,
how suspicious, how busy their imaginations all are!"
Harriet smiled again, and her smiles grew stronger. 
Harriet slept at Hartfield that night.  For some weeks past she
had been spending more than half her time there, and gradually
getting to have a bed-room appropriated to herself; and Emma
judged it best in every respect, safest and kindest, to keep her
with them as much as possible just at present.  She was obliged
to go the next morning for an hour or two to Mrs. Goddard's,
but it was then to be settled that she should return to Hartfield,
While she was gone, Mr. Knightley called, and sat some time with
Mr. Woodhouse and Emma, till Mr. Woodhouse, who had previously made up
his mind to walk out, was persuaded by his daughter not to defer it,
and was induced by the entreaties of both, though against the scruples
of his own civility, to leave Mr. Knightley for that purpose. 
Mr. Knightley, who had nothing of ceremony about him, was offering
by his short, decided answers, an amusing contrast to the protracted
"Well, I believe, if you will excuse me, Mr. Knightley, if you
will not consider me as doing a very rude thing, I shall take
Emma's advice and go out for a quarter of an hour.  As the sun
is out, I believe I had better take my three turns while I can. 
I treat you without ceremony, Mr. Knightley.  We invalids think we
"I leave an excellent substitute in my daughter.  Emma will be happy
to entertain you.  And therefore I think I will beg your excuse
"I would ask for the pleasure of your company, Mr. Knightley,
but I am a very slow walker, and my pace would be tedious to you;
and, besides, you have another long walk before you, to Donwell Abbey."
"Thank you, sir, thank you; I am going this moment myself; and I
think the sooner you go the better.  I will fetch your greatcoat
Mr. Woodhouse at last was off; but Mr. Knightley, instead of being
immediately off likewise, sat down again, seemingly inclined
for more chat.  He began speaking of Harriet, and speaking
of her with more voluntary praise than Emma had ever heard before. 
"I cannot rate her beauty as you do," said he; "but she is a
pretty little creature, and I am inclined to think very well of
her disposition.  Her character depends upon those she is with;
but in good hands she will turn out a valuable woman."
"I am glad you think so; and the good hands, I hope, may not be wanting."
"Come," said he, "you are anxious for a compliment, so I will
tell you that you have improved her.  You have cured her of her
school-girl's giggle; she really does you credit."
"Thank you.  I should be mortified indeed if I did not believe I
had been of some use; but it is not every body who will bestow
praise where they may.  You do not often overpower me with it."
"You are expecting her again, you say, this morning?"
"Almost every moment.  She has been gone longer already than
"Something has happened to delay her; some visitors perhaps."
"Harriet may not consider every body tiresome that you would."
Emma knew this was too true for contradiction, and therefore
"I do not pretend to fix on times or places, but I must tell you
that I have good reason to believe your little friend will soon
"A very serious sort, I assure you;" still smiling. 
"Very serious! I can think of but one thing--Who is in love
Emma was more than half in hopes of Mr. Elton's having dropt a hint. 
Mr. Knightley was a sort of general friend and adviser, and she knew
"I have reason to think," he replied, "that Harriet Smith will
soon have an offer of marriage, and from a most unexceptionable
quarter:--Robert Martin is the man.  Her visit to Abbey-Mill,
this summer, seems to have done his business.  He is desperately
"He is very obliging," said Emma; "but is he sure that Harriet
"Well, well, means to make her an offer then.  Will that do? He came
to the Abbey two evenings ago, on purpose to consult me about it. 
He knows I have a thorough regard for him and all his family, and,
I believe, considers me as one of his best friends.  He came to ask
me whether I thought it would be imprudent in him to settle so early;
whether I thought her too young: in short, whether I approved his
choice altogether; having some apprehension perhaps of her being
considered (especially since your making so much of her) as in a line
of society above him.  I was very much pleased with all that he said. 
I never hear better sense from any one than Robert Martin. 
He always speaks to the purpose; open, straightforward, and very
well judging.  He told me every thing; his circumstances and plans,
and what they all proposed doing in the event of his marriage.  He is
an excellent young man, both as son and brother.  I had no hesitation
in advising him to marry.  He proved to me that he could afford it;
and that being the case, I was convinced he could not do better. 
I praised the fair lady too, and altogether sent him away very happy. 
If he had never esteemed my opinion before, he would have thought
highly of me then; and, I dare say, left the house thinking me the
best friend and counsellor man ever had.  This happened the night
before last.  Now, as we may fairly suppose, he would not allow
much time to pass before he spoke to the lady, and as he does not
appear to have spoken yesterday, it is not unlikely that he should
be at Mrs. Goddard's to-day; and she may be detained by a visitor,
"Pray, Mr. Knightley," said Emma, who had been smiling to herself
through a great part of this speech, "how do you know that Mr. Martin
"Certainly," replied he, surprized, "I do not absolutely know it;
but it may be inferred.  Was not she the whole day with you?"
"Come," said she, "I will tell you something, in return for what
you have told me.  He did speak yesterday--that is, he wrote,
This was obliged to be repeated before it could be believed;
and Mr. Knightley actually looked red with surprize and displeasure,
"Then she is a greater simpleton than I ever believed her. 
"Oh! to be sure," cried Emma, "it is always incomprehensible
to a man that a woman should ever refuse an offer of marriage. 
A man always imagines a woman to be ready for any body who asks her."
"Nonsense! a man does not imagine any such thing.  But what is
the meaning of this? Harriet Smith refuse Robert Martin? madness,
"You saw her answer!--you wrote her answer too.  Emma, this is
"And if I did, (which, however, I am far from allowing) I should
not feel that I had done wrong.  Mr. Martin is a very respectable
young man, but I cannot admit him to be Harriet's equal; and am
rather surprized indeed that he should have ventured to address her. 
By your account, he does seem to have had some scruples.  It is
"Not Harriet's equal!" exclaimed Mr. Knightley loudly and warmly;
and with calmer asperity, added, a few moments afterwards, "No, he
is not her equal indeed, for he is as much her superior in sense
as in situation.  Emma, your infatuation about that girl blinds you. 
What are Harriet Smith's claims, either of birth, nature or education,
to any connexion higher than Robert Martin? She is the natural
daughter of nobody knows whom, with probably no settled provision
at all, and certainly no respectable relations.  She is known only
as parlour-boarder at a common school.  She is not a sensible girl,
nor a girl of any information.  She has been taught nothing useful,
and is too young and too simple to have acquired any thing herself. 
At her age she can have no experience, and with her little wit,
is not very likely ever to have any that can avail her. 
She is pretty, and she is good tempered, and that is all. 
My only scruple in advising the match was on his account, as being
beneath his deserts, and a bad connexion for him.  I felt that,
as to fortune, in all probability he might do much better; and that as
to a rational companion or useful helpmate, he could not do worse. 
But I could not reason so to a man in love, and was willing
to trust to there being no harm in her, to her having that sort
of disposition, which, in good hands, like his, might be easily led
aright and turn out very well.  The advantage of the match I felt
to be all on her side; and had not the smallest doubt (nor have I now)
that there would be a general cry-out upon her extreme good luck. 
Even your satisfaction I made sure of.  It crossed my mind immediately
that you would not regret your friend's leaving Highbury, for the
sake of her being settled so well.  I remember saying to myself,
`Even Emma, with all her partiality for Harriet, will think this a
"I cannot help wondering at your knowing so little of Emma as to say
any such thing.  What! think a farmer, (and with all his sense and all
his merit Mr. Martin is nothing more,) a good match for my intimate
friend! Not regret her leaving Highbury for the sake of marrying
a man whom I could never admit as an acquaintance of my own! I
wonder you should think it possible for me to have such feelings. 
I assure you mine are very different.  I must think your statement
by no means fair.  You are not just to Harriet's claims. 
They would be estimated very differently by others as well as myself;
Mr. Martin may be the richest of the two, but he is undoubtedly
her inferior as to rank in society.--The sphere in which she moves
"A degradation to illegitimacy and ignorance, to be married
"As to the circumstances of her birth, though in a legal sense
she may be called Nobody, it will not hold in common sense. 
She is not to pay for the offence of others, by being held below
the level of those with whom she is brought up.--There can scarcely
be a doubt that her father is a gentleman--and a gentleman of
fortune.--Her allowance is very liberal; nothing has ever been grudged
for her improvement or comfort.--That she is a gentleman's daughter,
is indubitable to me; that she associates with gentlemen's daughters,
no one, I apprehend, will deny.--She is superior to Mr. Robert Martin."
"Whoever might be her parents," said Mr. Knightley, "whoever may
have had the charge of her, it does not appear to have been any part
of their plan to introduce her into what you would call good society. 
After receiving a very indifferent education she is left in
Mrs. Goddard's hands to shift as she can;--to move, in short,
in Mrs. Goddard's line, to have Mrs. Goddard's acquaintance. 
Her friends evidently thought this good enough for her; and it was
good enough.  She desired nothing better herself.  Till you chose
to turn her into a friend, her mind had no distaste for her own set,
nor any ambition beyond it.  She was as happy as possible with the
Martins in the summer.  She had no sense of superiority then. 
If she has it now, you have given it.  You have been no friend to
Harriet Smith, Emma.  Robert Martin would never have proceeded so far,
if he had not felt persuaded of her not being disinclined to him. 
I know him well.  He has too much real feeling to address any
woman on the haphazard of selfish passion.  And as to conceit,
he is the farthest from it of any man I know.  Depend upon it he
It was most convenient to Emma not to make a direct reply to this
assertion; she chose rather to take up her own line of the subject again. 
"You are a very warm friend to Mr. Martin; but, as I said before,
are unjust to Harriet.  Harriet's claims to marry well are not
so contemptible as you represent them.  She is not a clever girl,
but she has better sense than you are aware of, and does not
deserve to have her understanding spoken of so slightingly. 
Waiving that point, however, and supposing her to be, as you
describe her, only pretty and good-natured, let me tell you, that in
the degree she possesses them, they are not trivial recommendations
to the world in general, for she is, in fact, a beautiful girl,
and must be thought so by ninety-nine people out of an hundred;
and till it appears that men are much more philosophic on the subject
of beauty than they are generally supposed; till they do fall
in love with well-informed minds instead of handsome faces, a girl,
with such loveliness as Harriet, has a certainty of being admired
and sought after, of having the power of chusing from among many,
consequently a claim to be nice.  Her good-nature, too, is not so very
slight a claim, comprehending, as it does, real, thorough sweetness
of temper and manner, a very humble opinion of herself, and a great
readiness to be pleased with other people.  I am very much mistaken
if your sex in general would not think such beauty, and such temper,
"Upon my word, Emma, to hear you abusing the reason you have,
is almost enough to make me think so too.  Better be without sense,
"To be sure!" cried she playfully.  "I know that is the feeling
of you all.  I know that such a girl as Harriet is exactly
what every man delights in--what at once bewitches his senses
and satisfies his judgment.  Oh! Harriet may pick and chuse. 
Were you, yourself, ever to marry, she is the very woman for you. 
And is she, at seventeen, just entering into life, just beginning
to be known, to be wondered at because she does not accept the first
offer she receives? No--pray let her have time to look about her."
"I have always thought it a very foolish intimacy," said Mr. Knightley
presently, "though I have kept my thoughts to myself; but I now
perceive that it will be a very unfortunate one for Harriet. 
You will puff her up with such ideas of her own beauty, and of what
she has a claim to, that, in a little while, nobody within her
reach will be good enough for her.  Vanity working on a weak head,
produces every sort of mischief.  Nothing so easy as for a young lady
to raise her expectations too high.  Miss Harriet Smith may not find
offers of marriage flow in so fast, though she is a very pretty girl. 
Men of sense, whatever you may chuse to say, do not want silly wives. 
Men of family would not be very fond of connecting themselves
with a girl of such obscurity-- and most prudent men would be
afraid of the inconvenience and disgrace they might be involved in,
when the mystery of her parentage came to be revealed.  Let her marry
Robert Martin, and she is safe, respectable, and happy for ever;
but if you encourage her to expect to marry greatly, and teach
her to be satisfied with nothing less than a man of consequence
and large fortune, she may be a parlour-boarder at Mrs. Goddard's
all the rest of her life--or, at least, (for Harriet Smith is a
girl who will marry somebody or other,) till she grow desperate,
and is glad to catch at the old writing-master's son."
"We think so very differently on this point, Mr. Knightley,
that there can be no use in canvassing it.  We shall only be making
each other more angry.  But as to my letting her marry Robert Martin,
it is impossible; she has refused him, and so decidedly, I think,
as must prevent any second application.  She must abide by the evil
of having refused him, whatever it may be; and as to the refusal itself,
I will not pretend to say that I might not influence her a little;
but I assure you there was very little for me or for any body to do. 
His appearance is so much against him, and his manner so bad,
that if she ever were disposed to favour him, she is not now. 
I can imagine, that before she had seen any body superior,
she might tolerate him.  He was the brother of her friends,
and he took pains to please her; and altogether, having seen
nobody better (that must have been his great assistant)
she might not, while she was at Abbey-Mill, find him disagreeable. 
But the case is altered now.  She knows now what gentlemen are;
and nothing but a gentleman in education and manner has any chance
"Nonsense, errant nonsense, as ever was talked!" cried Mr. Knightley.--"Robert
Martin's manners have sense, sincerity, and good-humour to recommend
them; and his mind has more true gentility than Harriet Smith could understand."
Emma made no answer, and tried to look cheerfully unconcerned, but was
really feeling uncomfortable and wanting him very much to be gone. 
She did not repent what she had done; she still thought herself
a better judge of such a point of female right and refinement than he
could be; but yet she had a sort of habitual respect for his judgment
in general, which made her dislike having it so loudly against her;
and to have him sitting just opposite to her in angry state,
was very disagreeable.  Some minutes passed in this unpleasant silence,
with only one attempt on Emma's side to talk of the weather,
but he made no answer.  He was thinking.  The result of his thoughts
"Robert Martin has no great loss--if he can but think so; and I
hope it will not be long before he does.  Your views for Harriet
are best known to yourself; but as you make no secret of your love
of match-making, it is fair to suppose that views, and plans,
and projects you have;--and as a friend I shall just hint to you
that if Elton is the man, I think it will be all labour in vain."
"Depend upon it, Elton will not do.  Elton is a very good sort of man,
and a very respectable vicar of Highbury, but not at all likely
to make an imprudent match.  He knows the value of a good income
as well as any body.  Elton may talk sentimentally, but he will
act rationally.  He is as well acquainted with his own claims, as you
can be with Harriet's. He knows that he is a very handsome young man,
and a great favourite wherever he goes; and from his general way
of talking in unreserved moments, when there are only men present,
I am convinced that he does not mean to throw himself away. 
I have heard him speak with great animation of a large family
of young ladies that his sisters are intimate with, who have all
"I am very much obliged to you," said Emma, laughing again. 
"If I had set my heart on Mr. Elton's marrying Harriet, it would
have been very kind to open my eyes; but at present I only want
to keep Harriet to myself.  I have done with match-making indeed. 
I could never hope to equal my own doings at Randalls.  I shall leave
"Good morning to you,"--said he, rising and walking off abruptly. 
He was very much vexed.  He felt the disappointment of the young man,
and was mortified to have been the means of promoting it, by the
sanction he had given; and the part which he was persuaded Emma had
taken in the affair, was provoking him exceedingly. 
Emma remained in a state of vexation too; but there was more
indistinctness in the causes of her's, than in his.  She did not always
feel so absolutely satisfied with herself, so entirely convinced that
her opinions were right and her adversary's wrong, as Mr. Knightley. 
He walked off in more complete self-approbation than he left for her. 
She was not so materially cast down, however, but that a little
time and the return of Harriet were very adequate restoratives. 
Harriet's staying away so long was beginning to make her uneasy. 
The possibility of the young man's coming to Mrs. Goddard's
that morning, and meeting with Harriet and pleading his own cause,
gave alarming ideas.  The dread of such a failure after all became the
prominent uneasiness; and when Harriet appeared, and in very good spirits,
and without having any such reason to give for her long absence,
she felt a satisfaction which settled her with her own mind,
and convinced her, that let Mr. Knightley think or say what he would,
she had done nothing which woman's friendship and woman's feelings
He had frightened her a little about Mr. Elton; but when she considered
that Mr. Knightley could not have observed him as she had done,
neither with the interest, nor (she must be allowed to tell herself,
in spite of Mr. Knightley's pretensions) with the skill of such
an observer on such a question as herself, that he had spoken it
hastily and in anger, she was able to believe, that he had rather
said what he wished resentfully to be true, than what he knew
any thing about.  He certainly might have heard Mr. Elton speak
with more unreserve than she had ever done, and Mr. Elton might not
be of an imprudent, inconsiderate disposition as to money matters;
he might naturally be rather attentive than otherwise to them;
but then, Mr. Knightley did not make due allowance for the influence
of a strong passion at war with all interested motives.  Mr. Knightley
saw no such passion, and of course thought nothing of its effects;
but she saw too much of it to feel a doubt of its overcoming any
hesitations that a reasonable prudence might originally suggest;
and more than a reasonable, becoming degree of prudence, she was very
Harriet's cheerful look and manner established hers: she came back,
not to think of Mr. Martin, but to talk of Mr. Elton.  Miss Nash
had been telling her something, which she repeated immediately
with great delight.  Mr. Perry had been to Mrs. Goddard's to attend
a sick child, and Miss Nash had seen him, and he had told Miss Nash,
that as he was coming back yesterday from Clayton Park, he had met
Mr. Elton, and found to his great surprize, that Mr. Elton was
actually on his road to London, and not meaning to return till
the morrow, though it was the whist-club night, which he had been
never known to miss before; and Mr. Perry had remonstrated with him
about it, and told him how shabby it was in him, their best player,
to absent himself, and tried very much to persuade him to put off
his journey only one day; but it would not do; Mr. Elton had been
determined to go on, and had said in a very particular way indeed,
that he was going on business which he would not put off for any
inducement in the world; and something about a very enviable commission,
and being the bearer of something exceedingly precious.  Mr. Perry
could not quite understand him, but he was very sure there must
be a lady in the case, and he told him so; and Mr. Elton only
looked very conscious and smiling, and rode off in great spirits. 
Miss Nash had told her all this, and had talked a great deal more
about Mr. Elton; and said, looking so very significantly at her,
"that she did not pretend to understand what his business might be,
but she only knew that any woman whom Mr. Elton could prefer,
she should think the luckiest woman in the world; for, beyond a doubt,
Mr. Elton had not his equal for beauty or agreeableness."
Mr. Knightley might quarrel with her, but Emma could not quarrel
with herself.  He was so much displeased, that it was longer than
usual before he came to Hartfield again; and when they did meet,
his grave looks shewed that she was not forgiven.  She was sorry,
but could not repent.  On the contrary, her plans and proceedings
were more and more justified and endeared to her by the general
The Picture, elegantly framed, came safely to hand soon after
Mr. Elton's return, and being hung over the mantelpiece of the common
sitting-room, he got up to look at it, and sighed out his half sentences
of admiration just as he ought; and as for Harriet's feelings, they were
visibly forming themselves into as strong and steady an attachment
as her youth and sort of mind admitted.  Emma was soon perfectly
satisfied of Mr. Martin's being no otherwise remembered, than as
he furnished a contrast with Mr. Elton, of the utmost advantage to the latter. 
Her views of improving her little friend's mind, by a great deal
of useful reading and conversation, had never yet led to more than
a few first chapters, and the intention of going on to-morrow.
It was much easier to chat than to study; much pleasanter to let
her imagination range and work at Harriet's fortune, than to be
labouring to enlarge her comprehension or exercise it on sober facts;
and the only literary pursuit which engaged Harriet at present,
the only mental provision she was making for the evening of life,
was the collecting and transcribing all the riddles of every sort
that she could meet with, into a thin quarto of hot-pressed paper,
made up by her friend, and ornamented with ciphers and trophies. 
In this age of literature, such collections on a very grand scale
are not uncommon.  Miss Nash, head-teacher at Mrs. Goddard's,
had written out at least three hundred; and Harriet, who had taken
the first hint of it from her, hoped, with Miss Woodhouse's help,
to get a great many more.  Emma assisted with her invention,
memory and taste; and as Harriet wrote a very pretty hand,
it was likely to be an arrangement of the first order, in form
Mr. Woodhouse was almost as much interested in the business as the girls,
and tried very often to recollect something worth their putting in. 
"So many clever riddles as there used to be when he was young-- he
wondered he could not remember them! but he hoped he should in time."
And it always ended in "Kitty, a fair but frozen maid."
His good friend Perry, too, whom he had spoken to on the subject,
did not at present recollect any thing of the riddle kind;
but he had desired Perry to be upon the watch, and as he went about
so much, something, he thought, might come from that quarter. 
It was by no means his daughter's wish that the intellects of
Highbury in general should be put under requisition.  Mr. Elton
was the only one whose assistance she asked.  He was invited
to contribute any really good enigmas, charades, or conundrums
that he might recollect; and she had the pleasure of seeing him
most intently at work with his recollections; and at the same time,
as she could perceive, most earnestly careful that nothing ungallant,
nothing that did not breathe a compliment to the sex should pass
his lips.  They owed to him their two or three politest puzzles;
and the joy and exultation with which at last he recalled,
and rather sentimentally recited, that well-known charade,
made her quite sorry to acknowledge that they had transcribed it
"Why will not you write one yourself for us, Mr. Elton?" said she;
"that is the only security for its freshness; and nothing could be
"Oh no! he had never written, hardly ever, any thing of the kind
in his life.  The stupidest fellow! He was afraid not even Miss
Woodhouse"--he stopt a moment-- "or Miss Smith could inspire him."
The very next day however produced some proof of inspiration. 
He called for a few moments, just to leave a piece of paper on the
table containing, as he said, a charade, which a friend of his had
addressed to a young lady, the object of his admiration, but which,
from his manner, Emma was immediately convinced must be his own. 
"I do not offer it for Miss Smith's collection," said he. 
"Being my friend's, I have no right to expose it in any degree
to the public eye, but perhaps you may not dislike looking at it."
The speech was more to Emma than to Harriet, which Emma
could understand.  There was deep consciousness about him,
and he found it easier to meet her eye than her friend's.
He was gone the next moment:--after another moment's pause,
"Take it," said Emma, smiling, and pushing the paper towards
But Harriet was in a tremor, and could not touch it; and Emma,
never loth to be first, was obliged to examine it herself. 
    My first displays the wealth and pomp of kings,
      Man's boasted power and freedom, all are flown;
She cast her eye over it, pondered, caught the meaning, read it through
again to be quite certain, and quite mistress of the lines, and then
passing it to Harriet, sat happily smiling, and saying to herself,
while Harriet was puzzling over the paper in all the confusion
of hope and dulness, "Very well, Mr. Elton, very well indeed. 
I have read worse charades.  Courtship--a very good hint.  I give
you credit for it.  This is feeling your way.  This is saying very
plainly-- `Pray, Miss Smith, give me leave to pay my addresses to you. 
Approve my charade and my intentions in the same glance.'
Harriet exactly.  Soft is the very word for her eye--of all epithets,
Humph--Harriet's ready wit! All the better.  A man must be very much
in love, indeed, to describe her so.  Ah! Mr. Knightley, I wish
you had the benefit of this; I think this would convince you. 
For once in your life you would be obliged to own yourself mistaken. 
An excellent charade indeed! and very much to the purpose. 
She was obliged to break off from these very pleasant observations,
which were otherwise of a sort to run into great length, by the
"What can it be, Miss Woodhouse?--what can it be? I have not an idea--I
cannot guess it in the least.  What can it possibly be? Do try
to find it out, Miss Woodhouse.  Do help me.  I never saw any thing
so hard.  Is it kingdom? I wonder who the friend was--and who could
be the young lady.  Do you think it is a good one? Can it be woman?
Or a trident? or a mermaid? or a shark? Oh, no! shark is only
one syllable.  It must be very clever, or he would not have brought it. 
Oh! Miss Woodhouse, do you think we shall ever find it out?"
"Mermaids and sharks! Nonsense! My dear Harriet, what are you
thinking of? Where would be the use of his bringing us a charade made
by a friend upon a mermaid or a shark? Give me the paper and listen. 
    My first displays the wealth and pomp of kings,
That is ship;--plain as it can be.--Now for the cream. 
    But ah! united, (courtship, you know,) what reverse we have!
      Man's boasted power and freedom, all are flown.
A very proper compliment!--and then follows the application,
which I think, my dear Harriet, you cannot find much difficulty
in comprehending.  Read it in comfort to yourself.  There can
be no doubt of its being written for you and to you."
Harriet could not long resist so delightful a persuasion. 
She read the concluding lines, and was all flutter and happiness. 
She could not speak.  But she was not wanted to speak.  It was enough
"There is so pointed, and so particular a meaning in this compliment,"
said she, "that I cannot have a doubt as to Mr. Elton's intentions. 
You are his object-- and you will soon receive the completest proof
of it.  I thought it must be so.  I thought I could not be so deceived;
but now, it is clear; the state of his mind is as clear and decided,
as my wishes on the subject have been ever since I knew you. 
Yes, Harriet, just so long have I been wanting the very circumstance
to happen what has happened.  I could never tell whether an attachment
between you and Mr. Elton were most desirable or most natural. 
Its probability and its eligibility have really so equalled each
other! I am very happy.  I congratulate you, my dear Harriet, with all
my heart.  This is an attachment which a woman may well feel pride
in creating.  This is a connexion which offers nothing but good. 
It will give you every thing that you want--consideration, independence,
a proper home--it will fix you in the centre of all your real friends,
close to Hartfield and to me, and confirm our intimacy for ever. 
This, Harriet, is an alliance which can never raise a blush in either
"Dear Miss Woodhouse!"--and "Dear Miss Woodhouse," was all that Harriet,
with many tender embraces could articulate at first; but when they
did arrive at something more like conversation, it was sufficiently
clear to her friend that she saw, felt, anticipated, and remembered
just as she ought.  Mr. Elton's superiority had very ample acknowledgment. 
"Whatever you say is always right," cried Harriet, "and therefore
I suppose, and believe, and hope it must be so; but otherwise I could
not have imagined it.  It is so much beyond any thing I deserve. 
Mr. Elton, who might marry any body! There cannot be two opinions
about him.  He is so very superior.  Only think of those sweet
verses--"To Miss --------." Dear me, how clever!--Could it really
"I cannot make a question, or listen to a question about that. 
It is a certainty.  Receive it on my judgment.  It is a sort
of prologue to the play, a motto to the chapter; and will be soon
"It is a sort of thing which nobody could have expected.  I am sure,
a month ago, I had no more idea myself!--The strangest things do
"When Miss Smiths and Mr. Eltons get acquainted--they do indeed--and
really it is strange; it is out of the common course that what is
so evidently, so palpably desirable--what courts the pre-arrangement
of other people, should so immediately shape itself into the proper form. 
You and Mr. Elton are by situation called together; you belong
to one another by every circumstance of your respective homes. 
Your marrying will be equal to the match at Randalls.  There does
seem to be a something in the air of Hartfield which gives love
exactly the right direction, and sends it into the very channel
      The course of true love never did run smooth--
A Hartfield edition of Shakespeare would have a long note on that passage."
"That Mr. Elton should really be in love with me,--me, of all people,
who did not know him, to speak to him, at Michaelmas! And he,
the very handsomest man that ever was, and a man that every body
looks up to, quite like Mr. Knightley! His company so sought after,
that every body says he need not eat a single meal by himself if he
does not chuse it; that he has more invitations than there are days
in the week.  And so excellent in the Church! Miss Nash has put down
all the texts he has ever preached from since he came to Highbury. 
Dear me! When I look back to the first time I saw him! How little
did I think!-- The two Abbots and I ran into the front room and
peeped through the blind when we heard he was going by, and Miss
Nash came and scolded us away, and staid to look through herself;
however, she called me back presently, and let me look too,
which was very good-natured. And how beautiful we thought he looked!
"This is an alliance which, whoever--whatever your friends may be,
must be agreeable to them, provided at least they have common sense;
and we are not to be addressing our conduct to fools.  If they
are anxious to see you happily married, here is a man whose amiable
character gives every assurance of it;--if they wish to have you
settled in the same country and circle which they have chosen
to place you in, here it will be accomplished; and if their only
object is that you should, in the common phrase, be well married,
here is the comfortable fortune, the respectable establishment,
"Yes, very true.  How nicely you talk; I love to hear you. 
You understand every thing.  You and Mr. Elton are one as clever
as the other.  This charade!--If I had studied a twelvemonth,
"I thought he meant to try his skill, by his manner of declining
"I do think it is, without exception, the best charade I ever read."
"I never read one more to the purpose, certainly."
"It is as long again as almost all we have had before."
"I do not consider its length as particularly in its favour. 
Harriet was too intent on the lines to hear.  The most satisfactory
"It is one thing," said she, presently--her cheeks in a glow--"to
have very good sense in a common way, like every body else,
and if there is any thing to say, to sit down and write a letter,
and say just what you must, in a short way; and another, to write
Emma could not have desired a more spirited rejection of Mr. Martin's prose. 
"Such sweet lines!" continued Harriet--"these two last!--But
how shall I ever be able to return the paper, or say I have found
it out?--Oh! Miss Woodhouse, what can we do about that?"
"Leave it to me.  You do nothing.  He will be here this evening,
I dare say, and then I will give it him back, and some nonsense
or other will pass between us, and you shall not be committed.--Your
soft eyes shall chuse their own time for beaming.  Trust to me."
"Oh! Miss Woodhouse, what a pity that I must not write this beautiful
charade into my book! I am sure I have not got one half so good."
"Leave out the two last lines, and there is no reason why you
--"The best of all.  Granted;--for private enjoyment; and for private
enjoyment keep them.  They are not at all the less written you know,
because you divide them.  The couplet does not cease to be, nor does
its meaning change.  But take it away, and all appropriation ceases,
and a very pretty gallant charade remains, fit for any collection. 
Depend upon it, he would not like to have his charade slighted,
much better than his passion.  A poet in love must be encouraged in
both capacities, or neither.  Give me the book, I will write it down,
and then there can be no possible reflection on you."
Harriet submitted, though her mind could hardly separate the parts,
so as to feel quite sure that her friend were not writing down
a declaration of love.  It seemed too precious an offering for any
"I shall never let that book go out of my own hands," said she. 
"Very well," replied Emma; "a most natural feeling; and the longer
it lasts, the better I shall be pleased.  But here is my father
coming: you will not object to my reading the charade to him. 
It will be giving him so much pleasure! He loves any thing of
the sort, and especially any thing that pays woman a compliment. 
He has the tenderest spirit of gallantry towards us all!-- You must
"My dear Harriet, you must not refine too much upon this
charade.--You will betray your feelings improperly, if you are
too conscious and too quick, and appear to affix more meaning,
or even quite all the meaning which may be affixed to it. 
Do not be overpowered by such a little tribute of admiration. 
If he had been anxious for secrecy, he would not have left the paper
while I was by; but he rather pushed it towards me than towards you. 
Do not let us be too solemn on the business.  He has encouragement
enough to proceed, without our sighing out our souls over this charade."
"Oh! no--I hope I shall not be ridiculous about it.  Do as you please."
Mr. Woodhouse came in, and very soon led to the subject again,
by the recurrence of his very frequent inquiry of "Well, my dears,
how does your book go on?--Have you got any thing fresh?"
"Yes, papa; we have something to read you, something quite fresh. 
A piece of paper was found on the table this morning--(dropt,
we suppose, by a fairy)-- containing a very pretty charade, and we
She read it to him, just as he liked to have any thing read,
slowly and distinctly, and two or three times over, with explanations
of every part as she proceeded-- and he was very much pleased, and,
as she had foreseen, especially struck with the complimentary conclusion. 
"Aye, that's very just, indeed, that's very properly said. 
Very true.  `Woman, lovely woman.' It is such a pretty charade,
my dear, that I can easily guess what fairy brought it.-- Nobody
Emma only nodded, and smiled.--After a little thinking,
"Ah! it is no difficulty to see who you take after! Your dear mother
was so clever at all those things! If I had but her memory! But I
can remember nothing;--not even that particular riddle which you
have heard me mention; I can only recollect the first stanza;
And that is all that I can recollect of it--but it is very clever
all the way through.  But I think, my dear, you said you had got it."
"Yes, papa, it is written out in our second page.  We copied it
from the Elegant Extracts.  It was Garrick's, you know."
"Aye, very true.--I wish I could recollect more of it. 
The name makes me think of poor Isabella; for she was very near
being christened Catherine after her grandmama.  I hope we shall
have her here next week.  Have you thought, my dear, where you
shall put her--and what room there will be for the children?"
"Oh! yes--she will have her own room, of course; the room she always
has;--and there is the nursery for the children,--just as usual,
"I do not know, my dear--but it is so long since she was here!--not
since last Easter, and then only for a few days.--Mr. John Knightley's
being a lawyer is very inconvenient.--Poor Isabella!--she is sadly
taken away from us all!--and how sorry she will be when she comes,
"I do not know, my dear.  I am sure I was very much surprized
"We must ask Mr. and Mrs. Weston to dine with us, while Isabella
"Yes, my dear, if there is time.--But--(in a very depressed tone)--she
is coming for only one week.  There will not be time for any thing."
"It is unfortunate that they cannot stay longer--but it seems a case
of necessity.  Mr. John Knightley must be in town again on the 28th,
and we ought to be thankful, papa, that we are to have the whole
of the time they can give to the country, that two or three days
are not to be taken out for the Abbey.  Mr. Knightley promises
to give up his claim this Christmas-- though you know it is longer
"It would be very hard, indeed, my dear, if poor Isabella were
Mr. Woodhouse could never allow for Mr. Knightley's claims on
his brother, or any body's claims on Isabella, except his own. 
"But I do not see why poor Isabella should be obliged to go back
so soon, though he does.  I think, Emma, I shall try and persuade
her to stay longer with us.  She and the children might stay very well."
"Ah! papa--that is what you never have been able to accomplish,
and I do not think you ever will.  Isabella cannot bear to stay
This was too true for contradiction.  Unwelcome as it was, Mr. Woodhouse
could only give a submissive sigh; and as Emma saw his spirits
affected by the idea of his daughter's attachment to her husband,
she immediately led to such a branch of the subject as must raise them. 
"Harriet must give us as much of her company as she can while
my brother and sister are here.  I am sure she will be pleased
with the children.  We are very proud of the children, are not we,
papa? I wonder which she will think the handsomest, Henry or John?"
"Aye, I wonder which she will.  Poor little dears, how glad they
will be to come.  They are very fond of being at Hartfield, Harriet."
"I dare say they are, sir.  I am sure I do not know who is not."
"Henry is a fine boy, but John is very like his mama.  Henry is the eldest,
he was named after me, not after his father.  John, the second,
is named after his father.  Some people are surprized, I believe,
that the eldest was not, but Isabella would have him called Henry,
which I thought very pretty of her.  And he is a very clever boy,
indeed.  They are all remarkably clever; and they have so many
pretty ways.  They will come and stand by my chair, and say,
`Grandpapa, can you give me a bit of string?' and once Henry asked me
for a knife, but I told him knives were only made for grandpapas. 
I think their father is too rough with them very often."
"He appears rough to you," said Emma, "because you are so very
gentle yourself; but if you could compare him with other papas,
you would not think him rough.  He wishes his boys to be active and hardy;
and if they misbehave, can give them a sharp word now and then;
but he is an affectionate father--certainly Mr. John Knightley
is an affectionate father.  The children are all fond of him."
"And then their uncle comes in, and tosses them up to the ceiling
"But they like it, papa; there is nothing they like so much. 
It is such enjoyment to them, that if their uncle did not lay down
the rule of their taking turns, whichever began would never give way
"That is the case with us all, papa.  One half of the world cannot
Later in the morning, and just as the girls were going to separate
in preparation for the regular four o'clock dinner, the hero
of this inimitable charade walked in again.  Harriet turned away;
but Emma could receive him with the usual smile, and her quick eye
soon discerned in his the consciousness of having made a push--of
having thrown a die; and she imagined he was come to see how it
might turn up.  His ostensible reason, however, was to ask whether
Mr. Woodhouse's party could be made up in the evening without him,
or whether he should be in the smallest degree necessary at Hartfield. 
If he were, every thing else must give way; but otherwise his friend
Cole had been saying so much about his dining with him--had made
such a point of it, that he had promised him conditionally to come. 
Emma thanked him, but could not allow of his disappointing his
friend on their account; her father was sure of his rubber. 
He re-urged --she re-declined; and he seemed then about to make
his bow, when taking the paper from the table, she returned it--
"Oh! here is the charade you were so obliging as to leave with us;
thank you for the sight of it.  We admired it so much, that I have
ventured to write it into Miss Smith's collection.  Your friend
will not take it amiss I hope.  Of course I have not transcribed
Mr. Elton certainly did not very well know what to say. 
He looked rather doubtingly--rather confused; said something about
"honour,"--glanced at Emma and at Harriet, and then seeing the book
open on the table, took it up, and examined it very attentively. 
With the view of passing off an awkward moment, Emma smilingly said,
"You must make my apologies to your friend; but so good a charade
must not be confined to one or two.  He may be sure of every woman's
"I have no hesitation in saying," replied Mr. Elton, though hesitating
a good deal while he spoke; "I have no hesitation in saying--at
least if my friend feels at all as I do--I have not the smallest
doubt that, could he see his little effusion honoured as I see it,
(looking at the book again, and replacing it on the table), he
would consider it as the proudest moment of his life."
After this speech he was gone as soon as possible.  Emma could not
think it too soon; for with all his good and agreeable qualities,
there was a sort of parade in his speeches which was very apt
to incline her to laugh.  She ran away to indulge the inclination,
leaving the tender and the sublime of pleasure to Harriet's share. 
Though now the middle of December, there had yet been no weather
to prevent the young ladies from tolerably regular exercise;
and on the morrow, Emma had a charitable visit to pay to a poor
sick family, who lived a little way out of Highbury.
Their road to this detached cottage was down Vicarage Lane, a lane
leading at right angles from the broad, though irregular, main street
of the place; and, as may be inferred, containing the blessed abode
of Mr. Elton.  A few inferior dwellings were first to be passed,
and then, about a quarter of a mile down the lane rose the Vicarage,
an old and not very good house, almost as close to the road as it
could be.  It had no advantage of situation; but had been very much
smartened up by the present proprietor; and, such as it was,
there could be no possibility of the two friends passing it without
a slackened pace and observing eyes.--Emma's remark was--
"There it is.  There go you and your riddle-book one of these days."--
"Oh, what a sweet house!--How very beautiful!--There are the yellow
"I do not often walk this way now," said Emma, as they proceeded,
"but then there will be an inducement, and I shall gradually get
intimately acquainted with all the hedges, gates, pools and pollards
Harriet, she found, had never in her life been within side the Vicarage,
and her curiosity to see it was so extreme, that, considering exteriors
and probabilities, Emma could only class it, as a proof of love,
"I wish we could contrive it," said she; "but I cannot think
of any tolerable pretence for going in;--no servant that I want
to inquire about of his housekeeper--no message from my father."
She pondered, but could think of nothing.  After a mutual silence
"I do so wonder, Miss Woodhouse, that you should not be married,
or going to be married! so charming as you are!"--
"My being charming, Harriet, is not quite enough to induce me to marry;
I must find other people charming--one other person at least. 
And I am not only, not going to be married, at present, but have
"I must see somebody very superior to any one I have seen yet,
to be tempted; Mr. Elton, you know, (recollecting herself,)
is out of the question:  and I do not wish to see any such person. 
I would rather not be tempted.  I cannot really change for the better. 
"Dear me!--it is so odd to hear a woman talk so!"--
"I have none of the usual inducements of women to marry. 
Were I to fall in love, indeed, it would be a different thing!
but I never have been in love; it is not my way, or my nature;
and I do not think I ever shall.  And, without love, I am sure I
should be a fool to change such a situation as mine.  Fortune I
do not want; employment I do not want; consequence I do not want: 
I believe few married women are half as much mistress of their
husband's house as I am of Hartfield; and never, never could I expect
to be so truly beloved and important; so always first and always
"But then, to be an old maid at last, like Miss Bates!"
"That is as formidable an image as you could present, Harriet; and if I
thought I should ever be like Miss Bates! so silly--so satisfied--
so smiling--so prosing--so undistinguishing and unfastidious--
and so apt to tell every thing relative to every body about me,
I would marry to-morrow. But between us, I am convinced there never
"But still, you will be an old maid! and that's so dreadful!"
"Never mind, Harriet, I shall not be a poor old maid; and it is
poverty only which makes celibacy contemptible to a generous public! 
A single woman, with a very narrow income, must be a ridiculous,
disagreeable old maid! the proper sport of boys and girls,
but a single woman, of good fortune, is always respectable,
and may be as sensible and pleasant as any body else.  And the
distinction is not quite so much against the candour and common
sense of the world as appears at first; for a very narrow income
has a tendency to contract the mind, and sour the temper. 
Those who can barely live, and who live perforce in a very small,
and generally very inferior, society, may well be illiberal and cross. 
This does not apply, however, to Miss Bates; she is only too good
natured and too silly to suit me; but, in general, she is very
much to the taste of every body, though single and though poor. 
Poverty certainly has not contracted her mind:  I really believe,
if she had only a shilling in the world, she would be very likely
to give away sixpence of it; and nobody is afraid of her:  that is a
"Dear me! but what shall you do? how shall you employ yourself
"If I know myself, Harriet, mine is an active, busy mind, with a great
many independent resources; and I do not perceive why I should be
more in want of employment at forty or fifty than one-and-twenty.
Woman's usual occupations of hand and mind will be as open to me then
as they are now; or with no important variation.  If I draw less,
I shall read more; if I give up music, I shall take to carpet-work.
And as for objects of interest, objects for the affections,
which is in truth the great point of inferiority, the want of which
is really the great evil to be avoided in not marrying, I shall
be very well off, with all the children of a sister I love so much,
to care about.  There will be enough of them, in all probability,
to supply every sort of sensation that declining life can need. 
There will be enough for every hope and every fear; and though my
attachment to none can equal that of a parent, it suits my ideas
of comfort better than what is warmer and blinder.  My nephews
"Do you know Miss Bates's niece?  That is, I know you must have
seen her a hundred times--but are you acquainted?"
"Oh! yes; we are always forced to be acquainted whenever she comes
to Highbury.  By the bye, that is almost enough to put one out
of conceit with a niece.  Heaven forbid! at least, that I should
ever bore people half so much about all the Knightleys together,
as she does about Jane Fairfax.  One is sick of the very name
of Jane Fairfax.  Every letter from her is read forty times over;
her compliments to all friends go round and round again; and if she
does but send her aunt the pattern of a stomacher, or knit a pair
of garters for her grandmother, one hears of nothing else for a month. 
I wish Jane Fairfax very well; but she tires me to death."
They were now approaching the cottage, and all idle topics
were superseded.  Emma was very compassionate; and the distresses
of the poor were as sure of relief from her personal attention
and kindness, her counsel and her patience, as from her purse. 
She understood their ways, could allow for their ignorance and
their temptations, had no romantic expectations of extraordinary
virtue from those for whom education had done so little; entered into
their troubles with ready sympathy, and always gave her assistance
with as much intelligence as good-will.  In the present instance,
it was sickness and poverty together which she came to visit;
and after remaining there as long as she could give comfort or advice,
she quitted the cottage with such an impression of the scene
"These are the sights, Harriet, to do one good.  How trifling they
make every thing else appear!--I feel now as if I could think of
nothing but these poor creatures all the rest of the day; and yet,
who can say how soon it may all vanish from my mind?"
"Very true," said Harriet.  "Poor creatures! one can think
"And really, I do not think the impression will soon be over,"
said Emma, as she crossed the low hedge, and tottering footstep
which ended the narrow, slippery path through the cottage garden,
and brought them into the lane again.  "I do not think it will,"
stopping to look once more at all the outward wretchedness of the place,
They walked on.  The lane made a slight bend; and when that bend
was passed, Mr. Elton was immediately in sight; and so near
"Ah!  Harriet, here comes a very sudden trial of our stability
in good thoughts.  Well, (smiling,) I hope it may be allowed that
if compassion has produced exertion and relief to the sufferers,
it has done all that is truly important.  If we feel for the wretched,
enough to do all we can for them, the rest is empty sympathy,
Harriet could just answer, "Oh! dear, yes," before the gentleman
joined them.  The wants and sufferings of the poor family, however,
were the first subject on meeting.  He had been going to call
on them.  His visit he would now defer; but they had a very
interesting parley about what could be done and should be done. 
"To fall in with each other on such an errand as this," thought Emma;
"to meet in a charitable scheme; this will bring a great increase
of love on each side.  I should not wonder if it were to bring
on the declaration.  It must, if I were not here.  I wish I were
Anxious to separate herself from them as far as she could, she soon
afterwards took possession of a narrow footpath, a little raised
on one side of the lane, leaving them together in the main road. 
But she had not been there two minutes when she found that Harriet's
habits of dependence and imitation were bringing her up too, and that,
in short, they would both be soon after her.  This would not do;
she immediately stopped, under pretence of having some alteration
to make in the lacing of her half-boot, and stooping down in complete
occupation of the footpath, begged them to have the goodness to walk on,
and she would follow in half a minute.  They did as they were desired;
and by the time she judged it reasonable to have done with her boot,
she had the comfort of farther delay in her power, being overtaken
by a child from the cottage, setting out, according to orders,
with her pitcher, to fetch broth from Hartfield.  To walk by the side
of this child, and talk to and question her, was the most natural
thing in the world, or would have been the most natural, had she been
acting just then without design; and by this means the others were
still able to keep ahead, without any obligation of waiting for her. 
She gained on them, however, involuntarily:  the child's pace was quick,
and theirs rather slow; and she was the more concerned at it,
from their being evidently in a conversation which interested them. 
Mr. Elton was speaking with animation, Harriet listening with a very
pleased attention; and Emma, having sent the child on, was beginning
to think how she might draw back a little more, when they both
Mr. Elton was still talking, still engaged in some interesting detail;
and Emma experienced some disappointment when she found that he
was only giving his fair companion an account of the yesterday's
party at his friend Cole's, and that she was come in herself for
the Stilton cheese, the north Wiltshire, the butter, the cellery,
"This would soon have led to something better, of course," was her
consoling reflection; "any thing interests between those who love;
and any thing will serve as introduction to what is near the heart. 
They now walked on together quietly, till within view of the vicarage
pales, when a sudden resolution, of at least getting Harriet into
the house, made her again find something very much amiss about her boot,
and fall behind to arrange it once more.  She then broke the lace
off short, and dexterously throwing it into a ditch, was presently
obliged to entreat them to stop, and acknowledged her inability to
put herself to rights so as to be able to walk home in tolerable comfort.
"Part of my lace is gone," said she, "and I do not know how I am
to contrive.  I really am a most troublesome companion to you both,
but I hope I am not often so ill-equipped. Mr. Elton, I must beg
leave to stop at your house, and ask your housekeeper for a bit
of ribband or string, or any thing just to keep my boot on."
Mr. Elton looked all happiness at this proposition; and nothing
could exceed his alertness and attention in conducting them into
his house and endeavouring to make every thing appear to advantage. 
The room they were taken into was the one he chiefly occupied,
and looking forwards; behind it was another with which it immediately
communicated; the door between them was open, and Emma passed
into it with the housekeeper to receive her assistance in the most
comfortable manner.  She was obliged to leave the door ajar as she
found it; but she fully intended that Mr. Elton should close it. 
It was not closed, however, it still remained ajar; but by engaging
the housekeeper in incessant conversation, she hoped to make it
practicable for him to chuse his own subject in the adjoining room. 
For ten minutes she could hear nothing but herself.  It could
be protracted no longer.  She was then obliged to be finished,
The lovers were standing together at one of the windows.  It had a
most favourable aspect; and, for half a minute, Emma felt the glory
of having schemed successfully.  But it would not do; he had not
come to the point.  He had been most agreeable, most delightful;
he had told Harriet that he had seen them go by, and had purposely
followed them; other little gallantries and allusions had been dropt,
"Cautious, very cautious," thought Emma; "he advances inch by inch,
and will hazard nothing till he believes himself secure."
Still, however, though every thing had not been accomplished
by her ingenious device, she could not but flatter herself
that it had been the occasion of much present enjoyment to both,
and must be leading them forward to the great event.
Mr. Elton must now be left to himself.  It was no longer in Emma's
power to superintend his happiness or quicken his measures. 
The coming of her sister's family was so very near at hand,
that first in anticipation, and then in reality, it became henceforth
her prime object of interest; and during the ten days of their stay
at Hartfield it was not to be expected--she did not herself expect--
that any thing beyond occasional, fortuitous assistance could
be afforded by her to the lovers.  They might advance rapidly
if they would, however; they must advance somehow or other whether
they would or no.  She hardly wished to have more leisure for them. 
There are people, who the more you do for them, the less they will
Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley, from having been longer than usual
absent from Surry, were exciting of course rather more than the
usual interest.  Till this year, every long vacation since their
marriage had been divided between Hartfield and Donwell Abbey;
but all the holidays of this autumn had been given to sea-bathing
for the children, and it was therefore many months since they had
been seen in a regular way by their Surry connexions, or seen at all
by Mr. Woodhouse, who could not be induced to get so far as London,
even for poor Isabella's sake; and who consequently was now most
nervously and apprehensively happy in forestalling this too short visit.
He thought much of the evils of the journey for her, and not a
little of the fatigues of his own horses and coachman who were to
bring some of the party the last half of the way; but his alarms
were needless; the sixteen miles being happily accomplished,
and Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley, their five children, and a competent
number of nursery-maids, all reaching Hartfield in safety. 
The bustle and joy of such an arrival, the many to be talked to,
welcomed, encouraged, and variously dispersed and disposed of,
produced a noise and confusion which his nerves could not have borne
under any other cause, nor have endured much longer even for this;
but the ways of Hartfield and the feelings of her father were
so respected by Mrs. John Knightley, that in spite of maternal
solicitude for the immediate enjoyment of her little ones,
and for their having instantly all the liberty and attendance,
all the eating and drinking, and sleeping and playing,
which they could possibly wish for, without the smallest delay,
the children were never allowed to be long a disturbance to him,
either in themselves or in any restless attendance on them.
Mrs. John Knightley was a pretty, elegant little woman, of gentle,
quiet manners, and a disposition remarkably amiable and affectionate;
wrapt up in her family; a devoted wife, a doating mother,
and so tenderly attached to her father and sister that, but for
these higher ties, a warmer love might have seemed impossible. 
She could never see a fault in any of them.  She was not a woman
of strong understanding or any quickness; and with this resemblance
of her father, she inherited also much of his constitution;
was delicate in her own health, over-careful of that of her children,
had many fears and many nerves, and was as fond of her own Mr. Wingfield
in town as her father could be of Mr. Perry.  They were alike too,
in a general benevolence of temper, and a strong habit of regard
Mr. John Knightley was a tall, gentleman-like, and very clever man;
rising in his profession, domestic, and respectable in his
private character; but with reserved manners which prevented his being
generally pleasing; and capable of being sometimes out of humour. 
He was not an ill-tempered man, not so often unreasonably cross
as to deserve such a reproach; but his temper was not his
great perfection; and, indeed, with such a worshipping wife,
it was hardly possible that any natural defects in it should not
be increased.  The extreme sweetness of her temper must hurt his. 
He had all the clearness and quickness of mind which she wanted,
and he could sometimes act an ungracious, or say a severe thing.
He was not a great favourite with his fair sister-in-law. Nothing
wrong in him escaped her.  She was quick in feeling the little
injuries to Isabella, which Isabella never felt herself. 
Perhaps she might have passed over more had his manners been
flattering to Isabella's sister, but they were only those of a calmly
kind brother and friend, without praise and without blindness;
but hardly any degree of personal compliment could have made her
regardless of that greatest fault of all in her eyes which he sometimes
fell into, the want of respectful forbearance towards her father. 
There he had not always the patience that could have been wished. 
Mr. Woodhouse's peculiarities and fidgetiness were sometimes provoking
him to a rational remonstrance or sharp retort equally ill-bestowed.
It did not often happen; for Mr. John Knightley had really a great
regard for his father-in-law, and generally a strong sense of what was
due to him; but it was too often for Emma's charity, especially as
there was all the pain of apprehension frequently to be endured,
though the offence came not.  The beginning, however, of every visit
displayed none but the properest feelings, and this being of necessity
so short might be hoped to pass away in unsullied cordiality. 
They had not been long seated and composed when Mr. Woodhouse,
with a melancholy shake of the head and a sigh, called his daughter's
attention to the sad change at Hartfield since she had been there last.
"Ah, my dear," said he, "poor Miss Taylor--It is a grievous business."
"Oh yes, sir," cried she with ready sympathy, "how you must
miss her!  And dear Emma, too!--What a dreadful loss to you both!--
I have been so grieved for you.--I could not imagine how you could
possibly do without her.--It is a sad change indeed.--But I hope
"Pretty well, my dear--I hope--pretty well.--I do not know
Mr. John Knightley here asked Emma quietly whether there were any
"Oh! no--none in the least.  I never saw Mrs. Weston better in my life--
never looking so well.  Papa is only speaking his own regret."
"Very much to the honour of both," was the handsome reply.
"And do you see her, sir, tolerably often?" asked Isabella
in the plaintive tone which just suited her father.
Mr. Woodhouse hesitated.--"Not near so often, my dear, as I could wish."
"Oh! papa, we have missed seeing them but one entire day since
they married.  Either in the morning or evening of every day,
excepting one, have we seen either Mr. Weston or Mrs. Weston,
and generally both, either at Randalls or here--and as you
may suppose, Isabella, most frequently here.  They are very,
very kind in their visits.  Mr. Weston is really as kind as herself. 
Papa, if you speak in that melancholy way, you will be giving
Isabella a false idea of us all.  Every body must be aware that Miss
Taylor must be missed, but every body ought also to be assured
that Mr. and Mrs. Weston do really prevent our missing her by any
means to the extent we ourselves anticipated--which is the exact truth."
"Just as it should be," said Mr. John Knightley, "and just as I hoped
it was from your letters.  Her wish of shewing you attention could
not be doubted, and his being a disengaged and social man makes it
all easy.  I have been always telling you, my love, that I had no idea
of the change being so very material to Hartfield as you apprehended;
and now you have Emma's account, I hope you will be satisfied."
"Why, to be sure," said Mr. Woodhouse--"yes, certainly--I cannot deny
that Mrs. Weston, poor Mrs. Weston, does come and see us pretty often--
but then--she is always obliged to go away again."
"It would be very hard upon Mr. Weston if she did not, papa.--
"I think, indeed," said John Knightley pleasantly, "that Mr. Weston
has some little claim.  You and I, Emma, will venture to take the part
of the poor husband.  I, being a husband, and you not being a wife,
the claims of the man may very likely strike us with equal force. 
As for Isabella, she has been married long enough to see the convenience
of putting all the Mr. Westons aside as much as she can."
"Me, my love," cried his wife, hearing and understanding only in part.--
"Are you talking about me?--I am sure nobody ought to be, or can be,
a greater advocate for matrimony than I am; and if it had not been
for the misery of her leaving Hartfield, I should never have thought
of Miss Taylor but as the most fortunate woman in the world;
and as to slighting Mr. Weston, that excellent Mr. Weston, I think
there is nothing he does not deserve.  I believe he is one of the
very best-tempered men that ever existed.  Excepting yourself
and your brother, I do not know his equal for temper.  I shall
never forget his flying Henry's kite for him that very windy day
last Easter--and ever since his particular kindness last September
twelvemonth in writing that note, at twelve o'clock at night,
on purpose to assure me that there was no scarlet fever at Cobham,
I have been convinced there could not be a more feeling heart nor
a better man in existence.--If any body can deserve him, it must be
"Where is the young man?" said John Knightley.  "Has he been here
"He has not been here yet," replied Emma.  "There was a strong
expectation of his coming soon after the marriage, but it ended
in nothing; and I have not heard him mentioned lately."
"But you should tell them of the letter, my dear," said her father. 
"He wrote a letter to poor Mrs. Weston, to congratulate her,
and a very proper, handsome letter it was.  She shewed it to me. 
I thought it very well done of him indeed.  Whether it was his own idea
you know, one cannot tell.  He is but young, and his uncle, perhaps--"
"My dear papa, he is three-and-twenty. You forget how time passes."
"Three-and-twenty!--is he indeed?--Well, I could not have thought it--
and he was but two years old when he lost his poor mother!  Well,
time does fly indeed!--and my memory is very bad.  However, it was
an exceeding good, pretty letter, and gave Mr. and Mrs. Weston
a great deal of pleasure.  I remember it was written from Weymouth,
and dated Sept. 28th--and began, `My dear Madam,' but I forget
how it went on; and it was signed `F. C. Weston Churchill.'--
"How very pleasing and proper of him!" cried the good-hearted Mrs. John
Knightley.  "I have no doubt of his being a most amiable young man. 
But how sad it is that he should not live at home with his father! 
There is something so shocking in a child's being taken away from his
parents and natural home!  I never could comprehend how Mr. Weston
could part with him.  To give up one's child!  I really never
could think well of any body who proposed such a thing to any body else."
"Nobody ever did think well of the Churchills, I fancy,"
observed Mr. John Knightley coolly.  "But you need not imagine
Mr. Weston to have felt what you would feel in giving up Henry
or John.  Mr. Weston is rather an easy, cheerful-tempered man,
than a man of strong feelings; he takes things as he finds them,
and makes enjoyment of them somehow or other, depending, I suspect,
much more upon what is called society for his comforts, that is,
upon the power of eating and drinking, and playing whist with his
neighbours five times a week, than upon family affection, or any
Emma could not like what bordered on a reflection on Mr. Weston,
and had half a mind to take it up; but she struggled, and let
it pass.  She would keep the peace if possible; and there was
something honourable and valuable in the strong domestic habits,
the all-sufficiency of home to himself, whence resulted her brother's
disposition to look down on the common rate of social intercourse,
and those to whom it was important.--It had a high claim to forbearance.
Mr. Knightley was to dine with them--rather against the inclination
of Mr. Woodhouse, who did not like that any one should share with him
in Isabella's first day.  Emma's sense of right however had decided it;
and besides the consideration of what was due to each brother,
she had particular pleasure, from the circumstance of the late
disagreement between Mr. Knightley and herself, in procuring him
She hoped they might now become friends again.  She thought it
was time to make up.  Making-up indeed would not do.  She certainly
had not been in the wrong, and he would never own that he had. 
Concession must be out of the question; but it was time to appear
to forget that they had ever quarrelled; and she hoped it might rather
assist the restoration of friendship, that when he came into the room
she had one of the children with her--the youngest, a nice little girl
about eight months old, who was now making her first visit to Hartfield,
and very happy to be danced about in her aunt's arms.  It did assist;
for though he began with grave looks and short questions, he was soon
led on to talk of them all in the usual way, and to take the child
out of her arms with all the unceremoniousness of perfect amity. 
Emma felt they were friends again; and the conviction giving
her at first great satisfaction, and then a little sauciness,
she could not help saying, as he was admiring the baby,
"What a comfort it is, that we think alike about our nephews and nieces. 
As to men and women, our opinions are sometimes very different;
but with regard to these children, I observe we never disagree."
"If you were as much guided by nature in your estimate of men
and women, and as little under the power of fancy and whim in your
dealings with them, as you are where these children are concerned,
"To be sure--our discordancies must always arise from my being
"Yes," said he, smiling--"and reason good.  I was sixteen years
"A material difference then," she replied--"and no doubt you were
much my superior in judgment at that period of our lives; but does
not the lapse of one-and-twenty years bring our understandings
"But still, not near enough to give me a chance of being right,
"I have still the advantage of you by sixteen years' experience, and by
not being a pretty young woman and a spoiled child.  Come, my dear Emma,
let us be friends, and say no more about it.  Tell your aunt, little Emma,
that she ought to set you a better example than to be renewing
old grievances, and that if she were not wrong before, she is now."
"That's true," she cried--"very true.  Little Emma, grow up
a better woman than your aunt.  Be infinitely cleverer and not
half so conceited.  Now, Mr. Knightley, a word or two more, and I
have done.  As far as good intentions went, we were both right,
and I must say that no effects on my side of the argument have yet
proved wrong.  I only want to know that Mr. Martin is not very,
"A man cannot be more so," was his short, full answer.
"Ah!--Indeed I am very sorry.--Come, shake hands with me."
This had just taken place and with great cordiality, when John
Knightley made his appearance, and "How d'ye do, George?" and "John,
how are you?" succeeded in the true English style, burying under
a calmness that seemed all but indifference, the real attachment
which would have led either of them, if requisite, to do every thing
The evening was quiet and conversable, as Mr. Woodhouse declined
cards entirely for the sake of comfortable talk with his
dear Isabella, and the little party made two natural divisions;
on one side he and his daughter; on the other the two Mr. Knightleys;
their subjects totally distinct, or very rarely mixing--and Emma
The brothers talked of their own concerns and pursuits, but principally
of those of the elder, whose temper was by much the most communicative,
and who was always the greater talker.  As a magistrate, he had
generally some point of law to consult John about, or, at least,
some curious anecdote to give; and as a farmer, as keeping in hand
the home-farm at Donwell, he had to tell what every field was to bear
next year, and to give all such local information as could not fail
of being interesting to a brother whose home it had equally been
the longest part of his life, and whose attachments were strong. 
The plan of a drain, the change of a fence, the felling of a tree,
and the destination of every acre for wheat, turnips, or spring corn,
was entered into with as much equality of interest by John, as his
cooler manners rendered possible; and if his willing brother ever
left him any thing to inquire about, his inquiries even approached
While they were thus comfortably occupied, Mr. Woodhouse was enjoying
a full flow of happy regrets and fearful affection with his daughter.
"My poor dear Isabella," said he, fondly taking her hand,
and interrupting, for a few moments, her busy labours for some one
of her five children--"How long it is, how terribly long since you
were here!  And how tired you must be after your journey!  You must
go to bed early, my dear--and I recommend a little gruel to you
before you go.--You and I will have a nice basin of gruel together. 
My dear Emma, suppose we all have a little gruel."
Emma could not suppose any such thing, knowing as she did,
that both the Mr. Knightleys were as unpersuadable on that article
as herself;--and two basins only were ordered.  After a little
more discourse in praise of gruel, with some wondering at its
not being taken every evening by every body, he proceeded to say,
"It was an awkward business, my dear, your spending the autumn
at South End instead of coming here.  I never had much opinion
"Mr. Wingfield most strenuously recommended it, sir--or we
should not have gone.  He recommended it for all the children,
but particularly for the weakness in little Bella's throat,--
"Ah! my dear, but Perry had many doubts about the sea doing her
any good; and as to myself, I have been long perfectly convinced,
though perhaps I never told you so before, that the sea is very
rarely of use to any body.  I am sure it almost killed me once."
"Come, come," cried Emma, feeling this to be an unsafe subject, "I must
beg you not to talk of the sea.  It makes me envious and miserable;--
I who have never seen it!  South End is prohibited, if you please. 
My dear Isabella, I have not heard you make one inquiry about
"Why, pretty well; but not quite well.  Poor Perry is bilious,
and he has not time to take care of himself--he tells me he has
not time to take care of himself--which is very sad--but he is
always wanted all round the country.  I suppose there is not a man
in such practice anywhere.  But then there is not so clever a man
"And Mrs. Perry and the children, how are they? do the children grow? 
I have a great regard for Mr. Perry.  I hope he will be calling soon. 
"I hope he will be here to-morrow, for I have a question or two to ask
him about myself of some consequence.  And, my dear, whenever he comes,
you had better let him look at little Bella's throat."
"Oh! my dear sir, her throat is so much better that I have hardly
any uneasiness about it.  Either bathing has been of the greatest
service to her, or else it is to be attributed to an excellent
embrocation of Mr. Wingfield's, which we have been applying
"It is not very likely, my dear, that bathing should have been
of use to her--and if I had known you were wanting an embrocation,
"You seem to me to have forgotten Mrs. and Miss Bates," said Emma,
"Oh! the good Bateses--I am quite ashamed of myself--but you
mention them in most of your letters.  I hope they are quite well. 
Good old Mrs. Bates--I will call upon her to-morrow, and take
my children.--They are always so pleased to see my children.--
And that excellent Miss Bates!--such thorough worthy people!--
"Why, pretty well, my dear, upon the whole.  But poor Mrs. Bates
"How sorry I am!  But colds were never so prevalent as they have been
this autumn.  Mr. Wingfield told me that he has never known them
more general or heavy--except when it has been quite an influenza."
"That has been a good deal the case, my dear; but not to the degree
you mention.  Perry says that colds have been very general,
but not so heavy as he has very often known them in November. 
Perry does not call it altogether a sickly season."
"No, I do not know that Mr. Wingfield considers it very sickly except--
"Ah! my poor dear child, the truth is, that in London it is always
a sickly season.  Nobody is healthy in London, nobody can be. 
It is a dreadful thing to have you forced to live there! so far off!--
"No, indeed--we are not at all in a bad air.  Our part of London is
very superior to most others!--You must not confound us with London
in general, my dear sir.  The neighbourhood of Brunswick Square
is very different from almost all the rest.  We are so very airy! 
I should be unwilling, I own, to live in any other part of the town;--
there is hardly any other that I could be satisfied to have my
children in:  but we are so remarkably airy!--Mr. Wingfield thinks
the vicinity of Brunswick Square decidedly the most favourable as
"Ah! my dear, it is not like Hartfield.  You make the best of it--
but after you have been a week at Hartfield, you are all of you
different creatures; you do not look like the same.  Now I cannot say,
that I think you are any of you looking well at present."
"I am sorry to hear you say so, sir; but I assure you, excepting those
little nervous head-aches and palpitations which I am never entirely
free from anywhere, I am quite well myself; and if the children were
rather pale before they went to bed, it was only because they were
a little more tired than usual, from their journey and the happiness
of coming.  I hope you will think better of their looks to-morrow;
for I assure you Mr. Wingfield told me, that he did not believe
he had ever sent us off altogether, in such good case.  I trust,
at least, that you do not think Mr. Knightley looking ill,"
turning her eyes with affectionate anxiety towards her husband.
"Middling, my dear; I cannot compliment you.  I think Mr. John
"What is the matter, sir?--Did you speak to me?" cried Mr. John
"I am sorry to find, my love, that my father does not think you
looking well--but I hope it is only from being a little fatigued. 
I could have wished, however, as you know, that you had seen
"My dear Isabella,"--exclaimed he hastily--"pray do not concern
yourself about my looks.  Be satisfied with doctoring and coddling
yourself and the children, and let me look as I chuse."
"I did not thoroughly understand what you were telling your brother,"
cried Emma, "about your friend Mr. Graham's intending to have a bailiff
from Scotland, to look after his new estate.  What will it answer? 
And she talked in this way so long and successfully that, when forced
to give her attention again to her father and sister, she had nothing
worse to hear than Isabella's kind inquiry after Jane Fairfax;
and Jane Fairfax, though no great favourite with her in general,
she was at that moment very happy to assist in praising.
"That sweet, amiable Jane Fairfax!" said Mrs. John Knightley.--
"It is so long since I have seen her, except now and then for a moment
accidentally in town!  What happiness it must be to her good old
grandmother and excellent aunt, when she comes to visit them! 
I always regret excessively on dear Emma's account that she cannot
be more at Highbury; but now their daughter is married, I suppose
Colonel and Mrs. Campbell will not be able to part with her at all. 
She would be such a delightful companion for Emma."
"Our little friend Harriet Smith, however, is just such another
pretty kind of young person.  You will like Harriet.  Emma could
"I am most happy to hear it--but only Jane Fairfax one knows to be
so very accomplished and superior!--and exactly Emma's age."
This topic was discussed very happily, and others succeeded of
similar moment, and passed away with similar harmony; but the evening
did not close without a little return of agitation.  The gruel came
and supplied a great deal to be said--much praise and many comments--
undoubting decision of its wholesomeness for every constitution,
and pretty severe Philippics upon the many houses where it was
never met with tolerable;--but, unfortunately, among the failures
which the daughter had to instance, the most recent, and therefore
most prominent, was in her own cook at South End, a young woman
hired for the time, who never had been able to understand what she
meant by a basin of nice smooth gruel, thin, but not too thin. 
Often as she had wished for and ordered it, she had never been able
to get any thing tolerable.  Here was a dangerous opening.
"Ah!" said Mr. Woodhouse, shaking his head and fixing his eyes on
her with tender concern.--The ejaculation in Emma's ear expressed,
"Ah! there is no end of the sad consequences of your going to
South End.  It does not bear talking of."  And for a little while
she hoped he would not talk of it, and that a silent rumination
might suffice to restore him to the relish of his own smooth gruel. 
After an interval of some minutes, however, he began with,
"I shall always be very sorry that you went to the sea this autumn,
"But why should you be sorry, sir?--I assure you, it did the children
"And, moreover, if you must go to the sea, it had better not
have been to South End.  South End is an unhealthy place. 
Perry was surprized to hear you had fixed upon South End."
"I know there is such an idea with many people, but indeed it is
quite a mistake, sir.--We all had our health perfectly well there,
never found the least inconvenience from the mud; and Mr. Wingfield
says it is entirely a mistake to suppose the place unhealthy;
and I am sure he may be depended on, for he thoroughly understands
the nature of the air, and his own brother and family have been
"You should have gone to Cromer, my dear, if you went anywhere.--
Perry was a week at Cromer once, and he holds it to be the best
of all the sea-bathing places.  A fine open sea, he says, and very
pure air.  And, by what I understand, you might have had lodgings there
quite away from the sea--a quarter of a mile off--very comfortable. 
"But, my dear sir, the difference of the journey;--only consider how
great it would have been.--An hundred miles, perhaps, instead of forty."
"Ah! my dear, as Perry says, where health is at stake, nothing else
should be considered; and if one is to travel, there is not much
to chuse between forty miles and an hundred.--Better not move at all,
better stay in London altogether than travel forty miles to get
into a worse air.  This is just what Perry said.  It seemed to him
Emma's attempts to stop her father had been vain; and when he
had reached such a point as this, she could not wonder at her
"Mr. Perry," said he, in a voice of very strong displeasure,
"would do as well to keep his opinion till it is asked for. 
Why does he make it any business of his, to wonder at what I do?--
at my taking my family to one part of the coast or another?--I may
be allowed, I hope, the use of my judgment as well as Mr. Perry.--
I want his directions no more than his drugs."  He paused--
and growing cooler in a moment, added, with only sarcastic dryness,
"If Mr. Perry can tell me how to convey a wife and five children
a distance of an hundred and thirty miles with no greater expense
or inconvenience than a distance of forty, I should be as willing to
"True, true," cried Mr. Knightley, with most ready interposition--
"very true.  That's a consideration indeed.--But John, as to what I
was telling you of my idea of moving the path to Langham, of turning
it more to the right that it may not cut through the home meadows,
I cannot conceive any difficulty.  I should not attempt it,
if it were to be the means of inconvenience to the Highbury people,
but if you call to mind exactly the present line of the path. . . . 
The only way of proving it, however, will be to turn to our maps. 
I shall see you at the Abbey to-morrow morning I hope, and then we
will look them over, and you shall give me your opinion."
Mr. Woodhouse was rather agitated by such harsh reflections on
his friend Perry, to whom he had, in fact, though unconsciously,
been attributing many of his own feelings and expressions;--
but the soothing attentions of his daughters gradually removed
the present evil, and the immediate alertness of one brother,
and better recollections of the other, prevented any renewal of it.
There could hardly be a happier creature in the world than Mrs. John
Knightley, in this short visit to Hartfield, going about every morning
among her old acquaintance with her five children, and talking
over what she had done every evening with her father and sister. 
She had nothing to wish otherwise, but that the days did not pass
so swiftly.  It was a delightful visit;--perfect, in being much too short.
In general their evenings were less engaged with friends than
their mornings; but one complete dinner engagement, and out
of the house too, there was no avoiding, though at Christmas. 
Mr. Weston would take no denial; they must all dine at Randalls
one day;--even Mr. Woodhouse was persuaded to think it a possible
How they were all to be conveyed, he would have made a difficulty
if he could, but as his son and daughter's carriage and horses
were actually at Hartfield, he was not able to make more than
a simple question on that head; it hardly amounted to a doubt;
nor did it occupy Emma long to convince him that they might in one
Harriet, Mr. Elton, and Mr. Knightley, their own especial set,
were the only persons invited to meet them;--the hours were to be early,
as well as the numbers few; Mr. Woodhouse's habits and inclination
The evening before this great event (for it was a very great event
that Mr. Woodhouse should dine out, on the 24th of December) had been
spent by Harriet at Hartfield, and she had gone home so much indisposed
with a cold, that, but for her own earnest wish of being nursed
by Mrs. Goddard, Emma could not have allowed her to leave the house. 
Emma called on her the next day, and found her doom already signed
with regard to Randalls.  She was very feverish and had a bad
sore throat:  Mrs. Goddard was full of care and affection, Mr. Perry
was talked of, and Harriet herself was too ill and low to resist
the authority which excluded her from this delightful engagement,
though she could not speak of her loss without many tears.
Emma sat with her as long as she could, to attend her in Mrs. Goddard's
unavoidable absences, and raise her spirits by representing how much
Mr. Elton's would be depressed when he knew her state; and left her
at last tolerably comfortable, in the sweet dependence of his having
a most comfortless visit, and of their all missing her very much. 
She had not advanced many yards from Mrs. Goddard's door, when she
was met by Mr. Elton himself, evidently coming towards it, and as
they walked on slowly together in conversation about the invalid--
of whom he, on the rumour of considerable illness, had been going
to inquire, that he might carry some report of her to Hartfield--
they were overtaken by Mr. John Knightley returning from the
daily visit to Donwell, with his two eldest boys, whose healthy,
glowing faces shewed all the benefit of a country run, and seemed
to ensure a quick despatch of the roast mutton and rice pudding they
were hastening home for.  They joined company and proceeded together. 
Emma was just describing the nature of her friend's complaint;--
"a throat very much inflamed, with a great deal of heat about her,
a quick, low pulse, &c.  and she was sorry to find from Mrs. Goddard
that Harriet was liable to very bad sore-throats, and had often
alarmed her with them."  Mr. Elton looked all alarm on the occasion,
"A sore-throat!--I hope not infectious.  I hope not of a putrid
infectious sort.  Has Perry seen her?  Indeed you should take care
of yourself as well as of your friend.  Let me entreat you to run
Emma, who was not really at all frightened herself, tranquillised this
excess of apprehension by assurances of Mrs. Goddard's experience
and care; but as there must still remain a degree of uneasiness
which she could not wish to reason away, which she would rather
feed and assist than not, she added soon afterwards--as if quite
"It is so cold, so very cold--and looks and feels so very much
like snow, that if it were to any other place or with any other party,
I should really try not to go out to-day--and dissuade my father
from venturing; but as he has made up his mind, and does not seem
to feel the cold himself, I do not like to interfere, as I know it
would be so great a disappointment to Mr. and Mrs. Weston.  But, upon
my word, Mr. Elton, in your case, I should certainly excuse myself. 
You appear to me a little hoarse already, and when you consider
what demand of voice and what fatigues to-morrow will bring,
I think it would be no more than common prudence to stay at home
Mr. Elton looked as if he did not very well know what answer to make;
which was exactly the case; for though very much gratified by the kind
care of such a fair lady, and not liking to resist any advice of
her's, he had not really the least inclination to give up the visit;--
but Emma, too eager and busy in her own previous conceptions
and views to hear him impartially, or see him with clear vision,
was very well satisfied with his muttering acknowledgment of its
being "very cold, certainly very cold," and walked on, rejoicing in
having extricated him from Randalls, and secured him the power
of sending to inquire after Harriet every hour of the evening.
"You do quite right," said she;--"we will make your apologies
But hardly had she so spoken, when she found her brother was civilly
offering a seat in his carriage, if the weather were Mr. Elton's
only objection, and Mr. Elton actually accepting the offer with much
prompt satisfaction.  It was a done thing; Mr. Elton was to go,
and never had his broad handsome face expressed more pleasure than
at this moment; never had his smile been stronger, nor his eyes
"Well," said she to herself, "this is most strange!--After I
had got him off so well, to chuse to go into company, and leave
Harriet ill behind!--Most strange indeed!--But there is, I believe,
in many men, especially single men, such an inclination--
such a passion for dining out--a dinner engagement is so high in
the class of their pleasures, their employments, their dignities,
almost their duties, that any thing gives way to it--and this must
be the case with Mr. Elton; a most valuable, amiable, pleasing young
man undoubtedly, and very much in love with Harriet; but still,
he cannot refuse an invitation, he must dine out wherever he is asked. 
What a strange thing love is! he can see ready wit in Harriet,
Soon afterwards Mr. Elton quitted them, and she could not but do him
the justice of feeling that there was a great deal of sentiment
in his manner of naming Harriet at parting; in the tone of his
voice while assuring her that he should call at Mrs. Goddard's
for news of her fair friend, the last thing before he prepared
for the happiness of meeting her again, when he hoped to be
able to give a better report; and he sighed and smiled himself
off in a way that left the balance of approbation much in his favour.
After a few minutes of entire silence between them, John Knightley
"I never in my life saw a man more intent on being agreeable than
Mr. Elton.  It is downright labour to him where ladies are concerned. 
With men he can be rational and unaffected, but when he has ladies
"Mr. Elton's manners are not perfect," replied Emma; "but where there
is a wish to please, one ought to overlook, and one does overlook
a great deal.  Where a man does his best with only moderate powers,
he will have the advantage over negligent superiority.  There is
such perfect good-temper and good-will in Mr. Elton as one cannot
"Yes," said Mr. John Knightley presently, with some slyness,
"he seems to have a great deal of good-will towards you."
"Me!" she replied with a smile of astonishment, "are you imagining
"Such an imagination has crossed me, I own, Emma; and if it never
occurred to you before, you may as well take it into consideration now."
"I do not say it is so; but you will do well to consider whether
it is so or not, and to regulate your behaviour accordingly. 
I think your manners to him encouraging.  I speak as a friend,
Emma.  You had better look about you, and ascertain what you do,
"I thank you; but I assure you you are quite mistaken.  Mr. Elton
and I are very good friends, and nothing more;" and she walked on,
amusing herself in the consideration of the blunders which often
arise from a partial knowledge of circumstances, of the mistakes
which people of high pretensions to judgment are for ever falling into;
and not very well pleased with her brother for imagining her blind
and ignorant, and in want of counsel.  He said no more.
Mr. Woodhouse had so completely made up his mind to the visit,
that in spite of the increasing coldness, he seemed to have no idea
of shrinking from it, and set forward at last most punctually
with his eldest daughter in his own carriage, with less apparent
consciousness of the weather than either of the others; too full
of the wonder of his own going, and the pleasure it was to afford at
Randalls to see that it was cold, and too well wrapt up to feel it. 
The cold, however, was severe; and by the time the second carriage
was in motion, a few flakes of snow were finding their way down,
and the sky had the appearance of being so overcharged as to want only
a milder air to produce a very white world in a very short time.
Emma soon saw that her companion was not in the happiest humour. 
The preparing and the going abroad in such weather, with the sacrifice
of his children after dinner, were evils, were disagreeables at least,
which Mr. John Knightley did not by any means like; he anticipated
nothing in the visit that could be at all worth the purchase;
and the whole of their drive to the vicarage was spent by him in
"A man," said he, "must have a very good opinion of himself when
he asks people to leave their own fireside, and encounter such
a day as this, for the sake of coming to see him.  He must think
himself a most agreeable fellow; I could not do such a thing. 
It is the greatest absurdity--Actually snowing at this moment!--
The folly of not allowing people to be comfortable at home--and the
folly of people's not staying comfortably at home when they can! 
If we were obliged to go out such an evening as this, by any call of
duty or business, what a hardship we should deem it;--and here are we,
probably with rather thinner clothing than usual, setting forward
voluntarily, without excuse, in defiance of the voice of nature,
which tells man, in every thing given to his view or his feelings,
to stay at home himself, and keep all under shelter that he can;--
here are we setting forward to spend five dull hours in another
man's house, with nothing to say or to hear that was not said
and heard yesterday, and may not be said and heard again to-morrow.
Going in dismal weather, to return probably in worse;--four horses
and four servants taken out for nothing but to convey five idle,
shivering creatures into colder rooms and worse company than they
Emma did not find herself equal to give the pleased assent, which no doubt
he was in the habit of receiving, to emulate the "Very true, my love,"
which must have been usually administered by his travelling companion;
but she had resolution enough to refrain from making any answer
at all.  She could not be complying, she dreaded being quarrelsome;
her heroism reached only to silence.  She allowed him to talk,
and arranged the glasses, and wrapped herself up, without opening
They arrived, the carriage turned, the step was let down,
and Mr. Elton, spruce, black, and smiling, was with them instantly. 
Emma thought with pleasure of some change of subject.  Mr. Elton
was all obligation and cheerfulness; he was so very cheerful
in his civilities indeed, that she began to think he must have
received a different account of Harriet from what had reached her. 
She had sent while dressing, and the answer had been, "Much the same--
"My report from Mrs. Goddard's," said she presently, "was not
so pleasant as I had hoped--`Not better' was my answer."
His face lengthened immediately; and his voice was the voice
"Oh! no--I am grieved to find--I was on the point of telling you that
when I called at Mrs. Goddard's door, which I did the very last thing
before I returned to dress, I was told that Miss Smith was not better,
by no means better, rather worse.  Very much grieved and concerned--
I had flattered myself that she must be better after such a cordial
Emma smiled and answered--"My visit was of use to the nervous part
of her complaint, I hope; but not even I can charm away a sore throat;
it is a most severe cold indeed.  Mr. Perry has been with her,
"He has been used to her in these complaints, and I hope to-morrow
morning will bring us both a more comfortable report.  But it is
impossible not to feel uneasiness.  Such a sad loss to our party to-day!"
"Dreadful!--Exactly so, indeed.--She will be missed every moment."
This was very proper; the sigh which accompanied it was really estimable;
but it should have lasted longer.  Emma was rather in dismay when
only half a minute afterwards he began to speak of other things,
and in a voice of the greatest alacrity and enjoyment.
"What an excellent device," said he, "the use of a sheepskin
for carriages.  How very comfortable they make it;--impossible to
feel cold with such precautions.  The contrivances of modern days
indeed have rendered a gentleman's carriage perfectly complete. 
One is so fenced and guarded from the weather, that not a breath
of air can find its way unpermitted.  Weather becomes absolutely
of no consequence.  It is a very cold afternoon--but in this carriage
we know nothing of the matter.--Ha! snows a little I see."
"Yes," said John Knightley, "and I think we shall have a good deal
"Christmas weather," observed Mr. Elton.  "Quite seasonable;
and extremely fortunate we may think ourselves that it did not
begin yesterday, and prevent this day's party, which it might very
possibly have done, for Mr. Woodhouse would hardly have ventured had
there been much snow on the ground; but now it is of no consequence. 
This is quite the season indeed for friendly meetings.  At Christmas
every body invites their friends about them, and people think little
of even the worst weather.  I was snowed up at a friend's house once
for a week.  Nothing could be pleasanter.  I went for only one night,
and could not get away till that very day se'nnight."
Mr. John Knightley looked as if he did not comprehend the pleasure,
"I cannot wish to be snowed up a week at Randalls."
At another time Emma might have been amused, but she was too
much astonished now at Mr. Elton's spirits for other feelings. 
Harriet seemed quite forgotten in the expectation of a pleasant party.
"We are sure of excellent fires," continued he, "and every thing
in the greatest comfort.  Charming people, Mr. and Mrs. Weston;--
Mrs. Weston indeed is much beyond praise, and he is exactly
what one values, so hospitable, and so fond of society;--
it will be a small party, but where small parties are select,
they are perhaps the most agreeable of any.  Mr. Weston's dining-room
does not accommodate more than ten comfortably; and for my part,
I would rather, under such circumstances, fall short by two than
exceed by two.  I think you will agree with me, (turning with a soft
air to Emma,) I think I shall certainly have your approbation,
though Mr. Knightley perhaps, from being used to the large parties
of London, may not quite enter into our feelings."
"I know nothing of the large parties of London, sir--I never dine
"Indeed! (in a tone of wonder and pity,) I had no idea that the
law had been so great a slavery.  Well, sir, the time must come
when you will be paid for all this, when you will have little
"My first enjoyment," replied John Knightley, as they passed through
the sweep-gate, "will be to find myself safe at Hartfield again."
Some change of countenance was necessary for each gentleman
as they walked into Mrs. Weston's drawing-room;--Mr. Elton must
compose his joyous looks, and Mr. John Knightley disperse his
ill-humour. Mr. Elton must smile less, and Mr. John Knightley more,
to fit them for the place.--Emma only might be as nature prompted,
and shew herself just as happy as she was.  To her it was real
enjoyment to be with the Westons.  Mr. Weston was a great favourite,
and there was not a creature in the world to whom she spoke with
such unreserve, as to his wife; not any one, to whom she related
with such conviction of being listened to and understood, of being
always interesting and always intelligible, the little affairs,
arrangements, perplexities, and pleasures of her father and herself. 
She could tell nothing of Hartfield, in which Mrs. Weston had not
a lively concern; and half an hour's uninterrupted communication
of all those little matters on which the daily happiness of private
life depends, was one of the first gratifications of each.
This was a pleasure which perhaps the whole day's visit might
not afford, which certainly did not belong to the present half-hour;
but the very sight of Mrs. Weston, her smile, her touch, her voice
was grateful to Emma, and she determined to think as little as
possible of Mr. Elton's oddities, or of any thing else unpleasant,
The misfortune of Harriet's cold had been pretty well gone through
before her arrival.  Mr. Woodhouse had been safely seated long
enough to give the history of it, besides all the history of his own
and Isabella's coming, and of Emma's being to follow, and had indeed
just got to the end of his satisfaction that James should come
and see his daughter, when the others appeared, and Mrs. Weston,
who had been almost wholly engrossed by her attentions to him,
Emma's project of forgetting Mr. Elton for a while made her rather
sorry to find, when they had all taken their places, that he was
close to her.  The difficulty was great of driving his strange
insensibility towards Harriet, from her mind, while he not only sat
at her elbow, but was continually obtruding his happy countenance
on her notice, and solicitously addressing her upon every occasion. 
Instead of forgetting him, his behaviour was such that she could
not avoid the internal suggestion of "Can it really be as my brother
imagined? can it be possible for this man to be beginning to transfer
his affections from Harriet to me?--Absurd and insufferable!"--
Yet he would be so anxious for her being perfectly warm, would be
so interested about her father, and so delighted with Mrs. Weston;
and at last would begin admiring her drawings with so much zeal
and so little knowledge as seemed terribly like a would-be lover,
and made it some effort with her to preserve her good manners. 
For her own sake she could not be rude; and for Harriet's, in the hope
that all would yet turn out right, she was even positively civil;
but it was an effort; especially as something was going on amongst
the others, in the most overpowering period of Mr. Elton's nonsense,
which she particularly wished to listen to.  She heard enough
to know that Mr. Weston was giving some information about his son;
she heard the words "my son," and "Frank," and "my son,"
repeated several times over; and, from a few other half-syllables
very much suspected that he was announcing an early visit from
his son; but before she could quiet Mr. Elton, the subject was
so completely past that any reviving question from her would have
Now, it so happened that in spite of Emma's resolution of never marrying,
there was something in the name, in the idea of Mr. Frank Churchill,
which always interested her.  She had frequently thought--especially since
his father's marriage with Miss Taylor--that if she were to marry,
he was the very person to suit her in age, character and condition. 
He seemed by this connexion between the families, quite to belong to her. 
She could not but suppose it to be a match that every body who knew
them must think of.  That Mr. and Mrs. Weston did think of it, she was
very strongly persuaded; and though not meaning to be induced by him,
or by any body else, to give up a situation which she believed more
replete with good than any she could change it for, she had a great
curiosity to see him, a decided intention of finding him pleasant,
of being liked by him to a certain degree, and a sort of pleasure
in the idea of their being coupled in their friends' imaginations.
With such sensations, Mr. Elton's civilities were dreadfully ill-timed;
but she had the comfort of appearing very polite, while feeling
very cross--and of thinking that the rest of the visit could not
possibly pass without bringing forward the same information again,
or the substance of it, from the open-hearted Mr. Weston.--So it proved;--
for when happily released from Mr. Elton, and seated by Mr. Weston,
at dinner, he made use of the very first interval in the cares
of hospitality, the very first leisure from the saddle of mutton,
"We want only two more to be just the right number.  I should
like to see two more here,--your pretty little friend, Miss Smith,
and my son--and then I should say we were quite complete. 
I believe you did not hear me telling the others in the drawing-room
that we are expecting Frank.  I had a letter from him this morning,
Emma spoke with a very proper degree of pleasure; and fully assented
to his proposition of Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss Smith making
"He has been wanting to come to us," continued Mr. Weston,
"ever since September:  every letter has been full of it;
but he cannot command his own time.  He has those to please
who must be pleased, and who (between ourselves) are sometimes
to be pleased only by a good many sacrifices.  But now
I have no doubt of seeing him here about the second week in January."
"What a very great pleasure it will be to you! and Mrs. Weston
is so anxious to be acquainted with him, that she must be almost
"Yes, she would be, but that she thinks there will be another
put-off. She does not depend upon his coming so much as I do: 
but she does not know the parties so well as I do.  The case,
you see, is--(but this is quite between ourselves:  I did not mention
a syllable of it in the other room.  There are secrets in all families,
you know)--The case is, that a party of friends are invited to pay
a visit at Enscombe in January; and that Frank's coming depends upon
their being put off.  If they are not put off, he cannot stir. 
But I know they will, because it is a family that a certain lady,
of some consequence, at Enscombe, has a particular dislike to: 
and though it is thought necessary to invite them once in two or
three years, they always are put off when it comes to the point. 
I have not the smallest doubt of the issue.  I am as confident
of seeing Frank here before the middle of January, as I am
of being here myself:  but your good friend there (nodding
towards the upper end of the table) has so few vagaries herself,
and has been so little used to them at Hartfield, that she cannot
calculate on their effects, as I have been long in the practice
"I am sorry there should be any thing like doubt in the case,"
replied Emma; "but am disposed to side with you, Mr. Weston.  If you
think he will come, I shall think so too; for you know Enscombe."
"Yes--I have some right to that knowledge; though I have never been
at the place in my life.--She is an odd woman!--But I never allow
myself to speak ill of her, on Frank's account; for I do believe
her to be very fond of him.  I used to think she was not capable
of being fond of any body, except herself:  but she has always been
kind to him (in her way--allowing for little whims and caprices,
and expecting every thing to be as she likes). And it is no small credit,
in my opinion, to him, that he should excite such an affection;
for, though I would not say it to any body else, she has no more
heart than a stone to people in general; and the devil of a temper."
Emma liked the subject so well, that she began upon it, to Mrs. Weston,
very soon after their moving into the drawing-room: wishing her joy--
yet observing, that she knew the first meeting must be rather alarming.--
Mrs. Weston agreed to it; but added, that she should be very
glad to be secure of undergoing the anxiety of a first meeting
at the time talked of:  "for I cannot depend upon his coming. 
I cannot be so sanguine as Mr. Weston.  I am very much afraid
that it will all end in nothing.  Mr. Weston, I dare say, has been
"Yes--it seems to depend upon nothing but the ill-humour
of Mrs. Churchill, which I imagine to be the most certain
"My Emma!" replied Mrs. Weston, smiling, "what is the certainty
of caprice?"  Then turning to Isabella, who had not been
attending before--"You must know, my dear Mrs. Knightley,
that we are by no means so sure of seeing Mr. Frank Churchill,
in my opinion, as his father thinks.  It depends entirely upon
his aunt's spirits and pleasure; in short, upon her temper. 
To you--to my two daughters--I may venture on the truth. 
Mrs. Churchill rules at Enscombe, and is a very odd-tempered woman;
and his coming now, depends upon her being willing to spare him."
"Oh, Mrs. Churchill; every body knows Mrs. Churchill,"
replied Isabella:  "and I am sure I never think of that poor young
man without the greatest compassion.  To be constantly living
with an ill-tempered person, must be dreadful.  It is what we
happily have never known any thing of; but it must be a life
of misery.  What a blessing, that she never had any children! 
Poor little creatures, how unhappy she would have made them!"
Emma wished she had been alone with Mrs. Weston.  She should then have
heard more:  Mrs. Weston would speak to her, with a degree of unreserve
which she would not hazard with Isabella; and, she really believed,
would scarcely try to conceal any thing relative to the Churchills
from her, excepting those views on the young man, of which her own
imagination had already given her such instinctive knowledge. 
But at present there was nothing more to be said.  Mr. Woodhouse
very soon followed them into the drawing-room. To be sitting
long after dinner, was a confinement that he could not endure. 
Neither wine nor conversation was any thing to him; and gladly did
he move to those with whom he was always comfortable.
While he talked to Isabella, however, Emma found an opportunity
"And so you do not consider this visit from your son as by any
means certain.  I am sorry for it.  The introduction must be unpleasant,
whenever it takes place; and the sooner it could be over, the better."
"Yes; and every delay makes one more apprehensive of other delays. 
Even if this family, the Braithwaites, are put off, I am still
afraid that some excuse may be found for disappointing us. 
I cannot bear to imagine any reluctance on his side; but I am sure
there is a great wish on the Churchills' to keep him to themselves. 
There is jealousy.  They are jealous even of his regard for his father. 
In short, I can feel no dependence on his coming, and I wish Mr. Weston
"He ought to come," said Emma.  "If he could stay only a couple
of days, he ought to come; and one can hardly conceive a young man's
not having it in his power to do as much as that.  A young woman,
if she fall into bad hands, may be teazed, and kept at a distance
from those she wants to be with; but one cannot comprehend a young
man's being under such restraint, as not to be able to spend a week
"One ought to be at Enscombe, and know the ways of the family,
before one decides upon what he can do," replied Mrs. Weston. 
"One ought to use the same caution, perhaps, in judging of the
conduct of any one individual of any one family; but Enscombe,
I believe, certainly must not be judged by general rules: 
she is so very unreasonable; and every thing gives way to her."
"But she is so fond of the nephew:  he is so very great a favourite. 
Now, according to my idea of Mrs. Churchill, it would be most natural,
that while she makes no sacrifice for the comfort of the husband,
to whom she owes every thing, while she exercises incessant caprice
towards him, she should frequently be governed by the nephew,
"My dearest Emma, do not pretend, with your sweet temper,
to understand a bad one, or to lay down rules for it:  you must
let it go its own way.  I have no doubt of his having, at times,
considerable influence; but it may be perfectly impossible for him
Emma listened, and then coolly said, "I shall not be satisfied,
"He may have a great deal of influence on some points,"
continued Mrs. Weston, "and on others, very little:  and among those,
on which she is beyond his reach, it is but too likely, may be
this very circumstance of his coming away from them to visit us."
Mr. Woodhouse was soon ready for his tea; and when he had drank his
tea he was quite ready to go home; and it was as much as his three
companions could do, to entertain away his notice of the lateness
of the hour, before the other gentlemen appeared.  Mr. Weston was
chatty and convivial, and no friend to early separations of any sort;
but at last the drawing-room party did receive an augmentation. 
Mr. Elton, in very good spirits, was one of the first to walk in. 
Mrs. Weston and Emma were sitting together on a sofa.  He joined
them immediately, and, with scarcely an invitation, seated himself
Emma, in good spirits too, from the amusement afforded her mind
by the expectation of Mr. Frank Churchill, was willing to forget
his late improprieties, and be as well satisfied with him as before,
and on his making Harriet his very first subject, was ready to listen
He professed himself extremely anxious about her fair friend--
her fair, lovely, amiable friend.  "Did she know?--had she
heard any thing about her, since their being at Randalls?--
he felt much anxiety--he must confess that the nature of her
complaint alarmed him considerably."  And in this style he talked
on for some time very properly, not much attending to any answer,
but altogether sufficiently awake to the terror of a bad sore throat;
But at last there seemed a perverse turn; it seemed all at once as if
he were more afraid of its being a bad sore throat on her account,
than on Harriet's--more anxious that she should escape the infection,
than that there should be no infection in the complaint.  He began
with great earnestness to entreat her to refrain from visiting
the sick-chamber again, for the present--to entreat her to promise
him not to venture into such hazard till he had seen Mr. Perry
and learnt his opinion; and though she tried to laugh it off
and bring the subject back into its proper course, there was no
putting an end to his extreme solicitude about her.  She was vexed. 
It did appear--there was no concealing it--exactly like the pretence
of being in love with her, instead of Harriet; an inconstancy,
if real, the most contemptible and abominable! and she had difficulty
in behaving with temper.  He turned to Mrs. Weston to implore
her assistance, "Would not she give him her support?--would not she
add her persuasions to his, to induce Miss Woodhouse not to go
to Mrs. Goddard's till it were certain that Miss Smith's disorder
had no infection?  He could not be satisfied without a promise--
would not she give him her influence in procuring it?"
"So scrupulous for others," he continued, "and yet so careless
for herself!  She wanted me to nurse my cold by staying at home to-day,
and yet will not promise to avoid the danger of catching an ulcerated
sore throat herself.  Is this fair, Mrs. Weston?--Judge between us. 
Have not I some right to complain?  I am sure of your kind support
Emma saw Mrs. Weston's surprize, and felt that it must be great,
at an address which, in words and manner, was assuming to himself
the right of first interest in her; and as for herself, she was
too much provoked and offended to have the power of directly
saying any thing to the purpose.  She could only give him a look;
but it was such a look as she thought must restore him to his senses,
and then left the sofa, removing to a seat by her sister, and giving
She had not time to know how Mr. Elton took the reproof, so rapidly
did another subject succeed; for Mr. John Knightley now came
into the room from examining the weather, and opened on them
all with the information of the ground being covered with snow,
and of its still snowing fast, with a strong drifting wind;
"This will prove a spirited beginning of your winter engagements,
sir.  Something new for your coachman and horses to be making
Poor Mr. Woodhouse was silent from consternation; but every body else
had something to say; every body was either surprized or not surprized,
and had some question to ask, or some comfort to offer.  Mrs. Weston
and Emma tried earnestly to cheer him and turn his attention
from his son-in-law, who was pursuing his triumph rather unfeelingly.
"I admired your resolution very much, sir," said he, "in venturing
out in such weather, for of course you saw there would be snow
very soon.  Every body must have seen the snow coming on. 
I admired your spirit; and I dare say we shall get home very well. 
Another hour or two's snow can hardly make the road impassable;
and we are two carriages; if one is blown over in the bleak part
of the common field there will be the other at hand.  I dare say we
Mr. Weston, with triumph of a different sort, was confessing that he
had known it to be snowing some time, but had not said a word,
lest it should make Mr. Woodhouse uncomfortable, and be an excuse
for his hurrying away.  As to there being any quantity of snow fallen
or likely to fall to impede their return, that was a mere joke;
he was afraid they would find no difficulty.  He wished the road might
be impassable, that he might be able to keep them all at Randalls;
and with the utmost good-will was sure that accommodation might
be found for every body, calling on his wife to agree with him,
that with a little contrivance, every body might be lodged,
which she hardly knew how to do, from the consciousness of there
"What is to be done, my dear Emma?--what is to be done?"
was Mr. Woodhouse's first exclamation, and all that he could say
for some time.  To her he looked for comfort; and her assurances
of safety, her representation of the excellence of the horses,
and of James, and of their having so many friends about them,
His eldest daughter's alarm was equal to his own.  The horror of
being blocked up at Randalls, while her children were at Hartfield,
was full in her imagination; and fancying the road to be now just
passable for adventurous people, but in a state that admitted no delay,
she was eager to have it settled, that her father and Emma should remain
at Randalls, while she and her husband set forward instantly through
all the possible accumulations of drifted snow that might impede them.
"You had better order the carriage directly, my love," said she;
"I dare say we shall be able to get along, if we set off directly;
and if we do come to any thing very bad, I can get out and walk. 
I am not at all afraid.  I should not mind walking half the way. 
I could change my shoes, you know, the moment I got home; and it is not
"Indeed!" replied he.  "Then, my dear Isabella, it is the most
extraordinary sort of thing in the world, for in general every
thing does give you cold.  Walk home!--you are prettily shod
for walking home, I dare say.  It will be bad enough for the horses."
Isabella turned to Mrs. Weston for her approbation of the plan. 
Mrs. Weston could only approve.  Isabella then went to Emma;
but Emma could not so entirely give up the hope of their being
all able to get away; and they were still discussing the point,
when Mr. Knightley, who had left the room immediately after his
brother's first report of the snow, came back again, and told them
that he had been out of doors to examine, and could answer for there
not being the smallest difficulty in their getting home, whenever they
liked it, either now or an hour hence.  He had gone beyond the sweep--
some way along the Highbury road--the snow was nowhere above half
an inch deep--in many places hardly enough to whiten the ground;
a very few flakes were falling at present, but the clouds were parting,
and there was every appearance of its being soon over.  He had seen
the coachmen, and they both agreed with him in there being nothing
To Isabella, the relief of such tidings was very great, and they
were scarcely less acceptable to Emma on her father's account,
who was immediately set as much at ease on the subject as his nervous
constitution allowed; but the alarm that had been raised could not
be appeased so as to admit of any comfort for him while he continued
at Randalls.  He was satisfied of there being no present danger in
returning home, but no assurances could convince him that it was safe
to stay; and while the others were variously urging and recommending,
Mr. Knightley and Emma settled it in a few brief sentences:  thus--
"Your father will not be easy; why do not you go?"
And the bell was rung, and the carriages spoken for.  A few
minutes more, and Emma hoped to see one troublesome companion
deposited in his own house, to get sober and cool, and the other
recover his temper and happiness when this visit of hardship were over.
The carriage came:  and Mr. Woodhouse, always the first object on
such occasions, was carefully attended to his own by Mr. Knightley
and Mr. Weston; but not all that either could say could prevent some
renewal of alarm at the sight of the snow which had actually fallen,
and the discovery of a much darker night than he had been prepared for. 
"He was afraid they should have a very bad drive.  He was afraid
poor Isabella would not like it.  And there would be poor Emma
in the carriage behind.  He did not know what they had best do. 
They must keep as much together as they could;" and James was talked to,
and given a charge to go very slow and wait for the other carriage.
Isabella stept in after her father; John Knightley, forgetting that he
did not belong to their party, stept in after his wife very naturally;
so that Emma found, on being escorted and followed into the second
carriage by Mr. Elton, that the door was to be lawfully shut on them,
and that they were to have a tete-a-tete drive.  It would not have been
the awkwardness of a moment, it would have been rather a pleasure,
previous to the suspicions of this very day; she could have talked
to him of Harriet, and the three-quarters of a mile would have
seemed but one.  But now, she would rather it had not happened. 
She believed he had been drinking too much of Mr. Weston's good wine,
and felt sure that he would want to be talking nonsense.
To restrain him as much as might be, by her own manners, she was
immediately preparing to speak with exquisite calmness and gravity
of the weather and the night; but scarcely had she begun, scarcely had
they passed the sweep-gate and joined the other carriage, than she
found her subject cut up--her hand seized--her attention demanded,
and Mr. Elton actually making violent love to her:  availing himself
of the precious opportunity, declaring sentiments which must be already
well known, hoping--fearing--adoring--ready to die if she refused him;
but flattering himself that his ardent attachment and unequalled
love and unexampled passion could not fail of having some effect,
and in short, very much resolved on being seriously accepted as soon
as possible.  It really was so.  Without scruple--without apology--
without much apparent diffidence, Mr. Elton, the lover of Harriet,
was professing himself her lover.  She tried to stop him; but vainly;
he would go on, and say it all.  Angry as she was, the thought of
the moment made her resolve to restrain herself when she did speak. 
She felt that half this folly must be drunkenness, and therefore
could hope that it might belong only to the passing hour. 
Accordingly, with a mixture of the serious and the playful, which she
hoped would best suit his half and half state, she replied,
"I am very much astonished, Mr. Elton.  This to me! you forget yourself--
you take me for my friend--any message to Miss Smith I shall
be happy to deliver; but no more of this to me, if you please."
"Miss Smith!--message to Miss Smith!--What could she possibly mean!"--
And he repeated her words with such assurance of accent, such boastful
pretence of amazement, that she could not help replying with quickness,
"Mr. Elton, this is the most extraordinary conduct! and I can account
for it only in one way; you are not yourself, or you could not speak
either to me, or of Harriet, in such a manner.  Command yourself
enough to say no more, and I will endeavour to forget it."
But Mr. Elton had only drunk wine enough to elevate his spirits,
not at all to confuse his intellects.  He perfectly knew his own meaning;
and having warmly protested against her suspicion as most injurious,
and slightly touched upon his respect for Miss Smith as her friend,--
but acknowledging his wonder that Miss Smith should be mentioned
at all,--he resumed the subject of his own passion, and was very
As she thought less of his inebriety, she thought more of his inconstancy
and presumption; and with fewer struggles for politeness, replied,
"It is impossible for me to doubt any longer.  You have made
yourself too clear.  Mr. Elton, my astonishment is much beyond
any thing I can express.  After such behaviour, as I have witnessed
during the last month, to Miss Smith--such attentions as I
have been in the daily habit of observing--to be addressing me
in this manner--this is an unsteadiness of character, indeed,
which I had not supposed possible!  Believe me, sir, I am far,
very far, from gratified in being the object of such professions."
"Good Heaven!" cried Mr. Elton, "what can be the meaning of this?--
Miss Smith!--I never thought of Miss Smith in the whole course
of my existence--never paid her any attentions, but as your friend: 
never cared whether she were dead or alive, but as your friend. 
If she has fancied otherwise, her own wishes have misled her,
and I am very sorry--extremely sorry--But, Miss Smith, indeed!--Oh! 
Miss Woodhouse! who can think of Miss Smith, when Miss Woodhouse
is near!  No, upon my honour, there is no unsteadiness of character. 
I have thought only of you.  I protest against having paid the smallest
attention to any one else.  Every thing that I have said or done,
for many weeks past, has been with the sole view of marking my
adoration of yourself.  You cannot really, seriously, doubt it. 
No!--(in an accent meant to be insinuating)--I am sure you have seen
It would be impossible to say what Emma felt, on hearing this--
which of all her unpleasant sensations was uppermost.  She was
too completely overpowered to be immediately able to reply: 
and two moments of silence being ample encouragement for Mr. Elton's
sanguine state of mind, he tried to take her hand again, as he
"Charming Miss Woodhouse! allow me to interpret this interesting silence. 
"No, sir," cried Emma, "it confesses no such thing.  So far from
having long understood you, I have been in a most complete error
with respect to your views, till this moment.  As to myself, I am
very sorry that you should have been giving way to any feelings--
Nothing could be farther from my wishes--your attachment to my
friend Harriet--your pursuit of her, (pursuit, it appeared,) gave me
great pleasure, and I have been very earnestly wishing you success: 
but had I supposed that she were not your attraction to Hartfield,
I should certainly have thought you judged ill in making your visits
so frequent.  Am I to believe that you have never sought to recommend
yourself particularly to Miss Smith?--that you have never thought
"Never, madam," cried he, affronted in his turn:  "never, I assure you. 
I think seriously of Miss Smith!--Miss Smith is a very good sort
of girl; and I should be happy to see her respectably settled. 
I wish her extremely well:  and, no doubt, there are men who might not
object to--Every body has their level:  but as for myself, I am not,
I think, quite so much at a loss.  I need not so totally despair
of an equal alliance, as to be addressing myself to Miss Smith!--
No, madam, my visits to Hartfield have been for yourself only;
"Encouragement!--I give you encouragement!--Sir, you have been entirely
mistaken in supposing it.  I have seen you only as the admirer
of my friend.  In no other light could you have been more to me than
a common acquaintance.  I am exceedingly sorry:  but it is well that
the mistake ends where it does.  Had the same behaviour continued,
Miss Smith might have been led into a misconception of your views;
not being aware, probably, any more than myself, of the very
great inequality which you are so sensible of.  But, as it is,
the disappointment is single, and, I trust, will not be lasting. 
He was too angry to say another word; her manner too decided
to invite supplication; and in this state of swelling resentment,
and mutually deep mortification, they had to continue together a few
minutes longer, for the fears of Mr. Woodhouse had confined them
to a foot-pace. If there had not been so much anger, there would have
been desperate awkwardness; but their straightforward emotions left
no room for the little zigzags of embarrassment.  Without knowing
when the carriage turned into Vicarage Lane, or when it stopped,
they found themselves, all at once, at the door of his house;
and he was out before another syllable passed.--Emma then felt it
indispensable to wish him a good night.  The compliment was just returned,
coldly and proudly; and, under indescribable irritation of spirits,
There she was welcomed, with the utmost delight, by her father,
who had been trembling for the dangers of a solitary drive from
Vicarage Lane--turning a corner which he could never bear to think of--
and in strange hands--a mere common coachman--no James; and there it
seemed as if her return only were wanted to make every thing go well: 
for Mr. John Knightley, ashamed of his ill-humour, was now all
kindness and attention; and so particularly solicitous for the comfort
of her father, as to seem--if not quite ready to join him in a basin
of gruel--perfectly sensible of its being exceedingly wholesome;
and the day was concluding in peace and comfort to all their little party,
except herself.--But her mind had never been in such perturbation;
and it needed a very strong effort to appear attentive and cheerful till
the usual hour of separating allowed her the relief of quiet reflection.
The hair was curled, and the maid sent away, and Emma sat down to think
and be miserable.--It was a wretched business indeed!--Such an overthrow
of every thing she had been wishing for!--Such a development of every
thing most unwelcome!--Such a blow for Harriet!--that was the worst
of all.  Every part of it brought pain and humiliation, of some sort
or other; but, compared with the evil to Harriet, all was light;
and she would gladly have submitted to feel yet more mistaken--
more in error--more disgraced by mis-judgment, than she actually was,
could the effects of her blunders have been confined to herself.
"If I had not persuaded Harriet into liking the man, I could have
borne any thing.  He might have doubled his presumption to me--
How she could have been so deceived!--He protested that he
had never thought seriously of Harriet--never!  She looked back
as well as she could; but it was all confusion.  She had taken
up the idea, she supposed, and made every thing bend to it. 
His manners, however, must have been unmarked, wavering, dubious,
The picture!--How eager he had been about the picture!--
and the charade!--and an hundred other circumstances;--
how clearly they had seemed to point at Harriet.  To be sure,
the charade, with its "ready wit"--but then the "soft eyes"--
in fact it suited neither; it was a jumble without taste or truth. 
Who could have seen through such thick-headed nonsense?
Certainly she had often, especially of late, thought his manners
to herself unnecessarily gallant; but it had passed as his way,
as a mere error of judgment, of knowledge, of taste, as one proof
among others that he had not always lived in the best society,
that with all the gentleness of his address, true elegance
was sometimes wanting; but, till this very day, she had never,
for an instant, suspected it to mean any thing but grateful respect
To Mr. John Knightley was she indebted for her first idea on
the subject, for the first start of its possibility.  There was
no denying that those brothers had penetration.  She remembered
what Mr. Knightley had once said to her about Mr. Elton, the caution
he had given, the conviction he had professed that Mr. Elton would
never marry indiscreetly; and blushed to think how much truer
a knowledge of his character had been there shewn than any she
had reached herself.  It was dreadfully mortifying; but Mr. Elton
was proving himself, in many respects, the very reverse of what she
had meant and believed him; proud, assuming, conceited; very full
of his own claims, and little concerned about the feelings of others.
Contrary to the usual course of things, Mr. Elton's wanting
to pay his addresses to her had sunk him in her opinion. 
His professions and his proposals did him no service.  She thought
nothing of his attachment, and was insulted by his hopes. 
He wanted to marry well, and having the arrogance to raise his
eyes to her, pretended to be in love; but she was perfectly easy
as to his not suffering any disappointment that need be cared for. 
There had been no real affection either in his language or manners. 
Sighs and fine words had been given in abundance; but she could
hardly devise any set of expressions, or fancy any tone of voice,
less allied with real love.  She need not trouble herself to pity him. 
He only wanted to aggrandise and enrich himself; and if Miss Woodhouse
of Hartfield, the heiress of thirty thousand pounds, were not quite
so easily obtained as he had fancied, he would soon try for Miss
But--that he should talk of encouragement, should consider her as
aware of his views, accepting his attentions, meaning (in short),
to marry him!--should suppose himself her equal in connexion
or mind!--look down upon her friend, so well understanding the
gradations of rank below him, and be so blind to what rose above,
as to fancy himself shewing no presumption in addressing her!--
Perhaps it was not fair to expect him to feel how very much he
was her inferior in talent, and all the elegancies of mind. 
The very want of such equality might prevent his perception of it;
but he must know that in fortune and consequence she was greatly
his superior.  He must know that the Woodhouses had been settled
for several generations at Hartfield, the younger branch
of a very ancient family--and that the Eltons were nobody. 
The landed property of Hartfield certainly was inconsiderable,
being but a sort of notch in the Donwell Abbey estate, to which all
the rest of Highbury belonged; but their fortune, from other sources,
was such as to make them scarcely secondary to Donwell Abbey itself,
in every other kind of consequence; and the Woodhouses had long
held a high place in the consideration of the neighbourhood which
Mr. Elton had first entered not two years ago, to make his way
as he could, without any alliances but in trade, or any thing
to recommend him to notice but his situation and his civility.--
But he had fancied her in love with him; that evidently must
have been his dependence; and after raving a little about the
seeming incongruity of gentle manners and a conceited head,
Emma was obliged in common honesty to stop and admit that her own
behaviour to him had been so complaisant and obliging, so full of
courtesy and attention, as (supposing her real motive unperceived)
might warrant a man of ordinary observation and delicacy,
like Mr. Elton, in fancying himself a very decided favourite.  If she
had so misinterpreted his feelings, she had little right to wonder
that he, with self-interest to blind him, should have mistaken hers.
The first error and the worst lay at her door.  It was foolish,
it was wrong, to take so active a part in bringing any two
people together.  It was adventuring too far, assuming too much,
making light of what ought to be serious, a trick of what ought
to be simple.  She was quite concerned and ashamed, and resolved
"Here have I," said she, "actually talked poor Harriet into being
very much attached to this man.  She might never have thought of him
but for me; and certainly never would have thought of him with hope,
if I had not assured her of his attachment, for she is as modest
and humble as I used to think him.  Oh! that I had been satisfied with
persuading her not to accept young Martin.  There I was quite right. 
That was well done of me; but there I should have stopped, and left
the rest to time and chance.  I was introducing her into good company,
and giving her the opportunity of pleasing some one worth having;
I ought not to have attempted more.  But now, poor girl, her peace
is cut up for some time.  I have been but half a friend to her;
and if she were not to feel this disappointment so very much, I am
sure I have not an idea of any body else who would be at all desirable
for her;--William Coxe--Oh! no, I could not endure William Coxe--
She stopt to blush and laugh at her own relapse, and then resumed
a more serious, more dispiriting cogitation upon what had been,
and might be, and must be.  The distressing explanation she had
to make to Harriet, and all that poor Harriet would be suffering,
with the awkwardness of future meetings, the difficulties of
continuing or discontinuing the acquaintance, of subduing feelings,
concealing resentment, and avoiding eclat, were enough to occupy
her in most unmirthful reflections some time longer, and she went
to bed at last with nothing settled but the conviction of her having
To youth and natural cheerfulness like Emma's, though under
temporary gloom at night, the return of day will hardly fail
to bring return of spirits.  The youth and cheerfulness of morning
are in happy analogy, and of powerful operation; and if the
distress be not poignant enough to keep the eyes unclosed, they
will be sure to open to sensations of softened pain and brighter hope.
Emma got up on the morrow more disposed for comfort than she had
gone to bed, more ready to see alleviations of the evil before her,
It was a great consolation that Mr. Elton should not be really
in love with her, or so particularly amiable as to make it shocking
to disappoint him--that Harriet's nature should not be of that
superior sort in which the feelings are most acute and retentive--
and that there could be no necessity for any body's knowing
what had passed except the three principals, and especially
for her father's being given a moment's uneasiness about it.
These were very cheering thoughts; and the sight of a great deal
of snow on the ground did her further service, for any thing was
welcome that might justify their all three being quite asunder
The weather was most favourable for her; though Christmas Day,
she could not go to church.  Mr. Woodhouse would have been miserable
had his daughter attempted it, and she was therefore safe from
either exciting or receiving unpleasant and most unsuitable ideas. 
The ground covered with snow, and the atmosphere in that unsettled
state between frost and thaw, which is of all others the most
unfriendly for exercise, every morning beginning in rain or snow,
and every evening setting in to freeze, she was for many days a most
honourable prisoner.  No intercourse with Harriet possible but by note;
no church for her on Sunday any more than on Christmas Day; and no
need to find excuses for Mr. Elton's absenting himself.
It was weather which might fairly confine every body at home;
and though she hoped and believed him to be really taking comfort
in some society or other, it was very pleasant to have her father
so well satisfied with his being all alone in his own house,
too wise to stir out; and to hear him say to Mr. Knightley, whom no
"Ah!  Mr. Knightley, why do not you stay at home like poor Mr. Elton?"
These days of confinement would have been, but for her private
perplexities, remarkably comfortable, as such seclusion exactly
suited her brother, whose feelings must always be of great importance
to his companions; and he had, besides, so thoroughly cleared off
his ill-humour at Randalls, that his amiableness never failed him
during the rest of his stay at Hartfield.  He was always agreeable
and obliging, and speaking pleasantly of every body.  But with all
the hopes of cheerfulness, and all the present comfort of delay,
there was still such an evil hanging over her in the hour of explanation
with Harriet, as made it impossible for Emma to be ever perfectly at ease.
Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley were not detained long at Hartfield. 
The weather soon improved enough for those to move who must move;
and Mr. Woodhouse having, as usual, tried to persuade his daughter
to stay behind with all her children, was obliged to see the whole
party set off, and return to his lamentations over the destiny
of poor Isabella;--which poor Isabella, passing her life with
those she doated on, full of their merits, blind to their faults,
and always innocently busy, might have been a model of right
The evening of the very day on which they went brought a note
from Mr. Elton to Mr. Woodhouse, a long, civil, ceremonious note,
to say, with Mr. Elton's best compliments, "that he was proposing
to leave Highbury the following morning in his way to Bath;
where, in compliance with the pressing entreaties of some friends,
he had engaged to spend a few weeks, and very much regretted
the impossibility he was under, from various circumstances of
weather and business, of taking a personal leave of Mr. Woodhouse,
of whose friendly civilities he should ever retain a grateful sense--
and had Mr. Woodhouse any commands, should be happy to attend to them."
Emma was most agreeably surprized.--Mr. Elton's absence just
at this time was the very thing to be desired.  She admired
him for contriving it, though not able to give him much credit
for the manner in which it was announced.  Resentment could not
have been more plainly spoken than in a civility to her father,
from which she was so pointedly excluded.  She had not even a
share in his opening compliments.--Her name was not mentioned;--
and there was so striking a change in all this, and such an
ill-judged solemnity of leave-taking in his graceful acknowledgments,
as she thought, at first, could not escape her father's suspicion.
It did, however.--Her father was quite taken up with the surprize
of so sudden a journey, and his fears that Mr. Elton might never get
safely to the end of it, and saw nothing extraordinary in his language. 
It was a very useful note, for it supplied them with fresh matter
for thought and conversation during the rest of their lonely evening. 
Mr. Woodhouse talked over his alarms, and Emma was in spirits
to persuade them away with all her usual promptitude.
She now resolved to keep Harriet no longer in the dark.  She had
reason to believe her nearly recovered from her cold, and it was
desirable that she should have as much time as possible for getting
the better of her other complaint before the gentleman's return. 
She went to Mrs. Goddard's accordingly the very next day, to undergo
the necessary penance of communication; and a severe one it was.--
She had to destroy all the hopes which she had been so industriously
feeding--to appear in the ungracious character of the one preferred--
and acknowledge herself grossly mistaken and mis-judging in all her
ideas on one subject, all her observations, all her convictions,
The confession completely renewed her first shame--and the sight
of Harriet's tears made her think that she should never be in charity
Harriet bore the intelligence very well--blaming nobody--
and in every thing testifying such an ingenuousness of disposition
and lowly opinion of herself, as must appear with particular
Emma was in the humour to value simplicity and modesty to the utmost;
and all that was amiable, all that ought to be attaching,
seemed on Harriet's side, not her own.  Harriet did not consider
herself as having any thing to complain of.  The affection of such
a man as Mr. Elton would have been too great a distinction.--
She never could have deserved him--and nobody but so partial
and kind a friend as Miss Woodhouse would have thought it possible.
Her tears fell abundantly--but her grief was so truly artless,
that no dignity could have made it more respectable in Emma's eyes--
and she listened to her and tried to console her with all her heart
and understanding--really for the time convinced that Harriet was
the superior creature of the two--and that to resemble her would
be more for her own welfare and happiness than all that genius or
It was rather too late in the day to set about being simple-minded
and ignorant; but she left her with every previous resolution
confirmed of being humble and discreet, and repressing imagination
all the rest of her life.  Her second duty now, inferior only to her
father's claims, was to promote Harriet's comfort, and endeavour
to prove her own affection in some better method than by match-making. 
She got her to Hartfield, and shewed her the most unvarying kindness,
striving to occupy and amuse her, and by books and conversation,
Time, she knew, must be allowed for this being thoroughly done; and she
could suppose herself but an indifferent judge of such matters in general,
and very inadequate to sympathise in an attachment to Mr. Elton
in particular; but it seemed to her reasonable that at Harriet's age,
and with the entire extinction of all hope, such a progress might be
made towards a state of composure by the time of Mr. Elton's return,
as to allow them all to meet again in the common routine of acquaintance,
without any danger of betraying sentiments or increasing them.
Harriet did think him all perfection, and maintained the non-existence
of any body equal to him in person or goodness--and did, in truth,
prove herself more resolutely in love than Emma had foreseen;
but yet it appeared to her so natural, so inevitable to strive
against an inclination of that sort unrequited, that she could not
comprehend its continuing very long in equal force.
If Mr. Elton, on his return, made his own indifference as evident
and indubitable as she could not doubt he would anxiously do,
she could not imagine Harriet's persisting to place her happiness
Their being fixed, so absolutely fixed, in the same place, was bad
for each, for all three.  Not one of them had the power of removal,
or of effecting any material change of society.  They must encounter
Harriet was farther unfortunate in the tone of her companions at
Mrs. Goddard's; Mr. Elton being the adoration of all the teachers
and great girls in the school; and it must be at Hartfield only
that she could have any chance of hearing him spoken of with cooling
moderation or repellent truth.  Where the wound had been given,
there must the cure be found if anywhere; and Emma felt that,
till she saw her in the way of cure, there could be no true peace
Mr. Frank Churchill did not come.  When the time proposed
drew near, Mrs. Weston's fears were justified in the arrival
of a letter of excuse.  For the present, he could not be spared,
to his "very great mortification and regret; but still he looked
forward with the hope of coming to Randalls at no distant period."
Mrs. Weston was exceedingly disappointed--much more disappointed,
in fact, than her husband, though her dependence on seeing the
young man had been so much more sober:  but a sanguine temper,
though for ever expecting more good than occurs, does not
always pay for its hopes by any proportionate depression. 
It soon flies over the present failure, and begins to hope again. 
For half an hour Mr. Weston was surprized and sorry; but then he
began to perceive that Frank's coming two or three months later
would be a much better plan; better time of year; better weather;
and that he would be able, without any doubt, to stay considerably
These feelings rapidly restored his comfort, while Mrs. Weston,
of a more apprehensive disposition, foresaw nothing but a repetition
of excuses and delays; and after all her concern for what her husband
was to suffer, suffered a great deal more herself.
Emma was not at this time in a state of spirits to care really
about Mr. Frank Churchill's not coming, except as a disappointment
at Randalls.  The acquaintance at present had no charm for her. 
She wanted, rather, to be quiet, and out of temptation; but still, as it
was desirable that she should appear, in general, like her usual self,
she took care to express as much interest in the circumstance,
and enter as warmly into Mr. and Mrs. Weston's disappointment,
She was the first to announce it to Mr. Knightley; and exclaimed
quite as much as was necessary, (or, being acting a part, perhaps
rather more,) at the conduct of the Churchills, in keeping him away. 
She then proceeded to say a good deal more than she felt, of the
advantage of such an addition to their confined society in Surry;
the pleasure of looking at somebody new; the gala-day to Highbury entire,
which the sight of him would have made; and ending with reflections
on the Churchills again, found herself directly involved in a
disagreement with Mr. Knightley; and, to her great amusement,
perceived that she was taking the other side of the question from her
real opinion, and making use of Mrs. Weston's arguments against herself.
"The Churchills are very likely in fault," said Mr. Knightley,
coolly; "but I dare say he might come if he would."
"I do not know why you should say so.  He wishes exceedingly to come;
"I cannot believe that he has not the power of coming, if he made
a point of it.  It is too unlikely, for me to believe it without proof."
"How odd you are!  What has Mr. Frank Churchill done, to make you
"I am not supposing him at all an unnatural creature, in suspecting
that he may have learnt to be above his connexions, and to care
very little for any thing but his own pleasure, from living with
those who have always set him the example of it.  It is a great deal
more natural than one could wish, that a young man, brought up
by those who are proud, luxurious, and selfish, should be proud,
luxurious, and selfish too.  If Frank Churchill had wanted to see
his father, he would have contrived it between September and January. 
A man at his age--what is he?--three or four-and-twenty--cannot be
without the means of doing as much as that.  It is impossible."
"That's easily said, and easily felt by you, who have always
been your own master.  You are the worst judge in the world,
Mr. Knightley, of the difficulties of dependence.  You do not know
"It is not to be conceived that a man of three or four-and-twenty
should not have liberty of mind or limb to that amount.  He cannot
want money--he cannot want leisure.  We know, on the contrary,
that he has so much of both, that he is glad to get rid of them at
the idlest haunts in the kingdom.  We hear of him for ever at some
watering-place or other.  A little while ago, he was at Weymouth. 
"And those times are whenever he thinks it worth his while;
"It is very unfair to judge of any body's conduct, without an
intimate knowledge of their situation.  Nobody, who has not been
in the interior of a family, can say what the difficulties
of any individual of that family may be.  We ought to be
acquainted with Enscombe, and with Mrs. Churchill's temper,
before we pretend to decide upon what her nephew can do. 
He may, at times, be able to do a great deal more than he can at others."
"There is one thing, Emma, which a man can always do, if he chuses,
and that is, his duty; not by manoeuvring and finessing, but by vigour
and resolution.  It is Frank Churchill's duty to pay this attention
to his father.  He knows it to be so, by his promises and messages;
but if he wished to do it, it might be done.  A man who felt rightly
would say at once, simply and resolutely, to Mrs. Churchill--
`Every sacrifice of mere pleasure you will always find me ready to make
to your convenience; but I must go and see my father immediately. 
I know he would be hurt by my failing in such a mark of respect to him
on the present occasion.  I shall, therefore, set off to-morrow.'--
If he would say so to her at once, in the tone of decision becoming
a man, there would be no opposition made to his going."
"No," said Emma, laughing; "but perhaps there might be some made to his
coming back again.  Such language for a young man entirely dependent,
to use!--Nobody but you, Mr. Knightley, would imagine it possible. 
But you have not an idea of what is requisite in situations directly
opposite to your own.  Mr. Frank Churchill to be making such
a speech as that to the uncle and aunt, who have brought him up,
and are to provide for him!--Standing up in the middle of the room,
I suppose, and speaking as loud as he could!--How can you imagine
"Depend upon it, Emma, a sensible man would find no difficulty in it. 
He would feel himself in the right; and the declaration--made,
of course, as a man of sense would make it, in a proper manner--
would do him more good, raise him higher, fix his interest stronger
with the people he depended on, than all that a line of shifts
and expedients can ever do.  Respect would be added to affection. 
They would feel that they could trust him; that the nephew who had
done rightly by his father, would do rightly by them; for they know,
as well as he does, as well as all the world must know, that he
ought to pay this visit to his father; and while meanly exerting
their power to delay it, are in their hearts not thinking the better
of him for submitting to their whims.  Respect for right conduct
is felt by every body.  If he would act in this sort of manner,
on principle, consistently, regularly, their little minds would bend
"I rather doubt that.  You are very fond of bending little minds;
but where little minds belong to rich people in authority,
I think they have a knack of swelling out, till they are quite as
unmanageable as great ones.  I can imagine, that if you, as you are,
Mr. Knightley, were to be transported and placed all at once in
Mr. Frank Churchill's situation, you would be able to say and do
just what you have been recommending for him; and it might have
a very good effect.  The Churchills might not have a word to say
in return; but then, you would have no habits of early obedience
and long observance to break through.  To him who has, it might
not be so easy to burst forth at once into perfect independence,
and set all their claims on his gratitude and regard at nought. 
He may have as strong a sense of what would be right, as you can have,
without being so equal, under particular circumstances, to act up
"Then it would not be so strong a sense.  If it failed to produce
equal exertion, it could not be an equal conviction."
"Oh, the difference of situation and habit!  I wish you would try
to understand what an amiable young man may be likely to feel
in directly opposing those, whom as child and boy he has been
"Our amiable young man is a very weak young man, if this be the first
occasion of his carrying through a resolution to do right against
the will of others.  It ought to have been a habit with him by
this time, of following his duty, instead of consulting expediency. 
I can allow for the fears of the child, but not of the man. 
As he became rational, he ought to have roused himself and shaken off
all that was unworthy in their authority.  He ought to have opposed
the first attempt on their side to make him slight his father. 
Had he begun as he ought, there would have been no difficulty now."
"We shall never agree about him," cried Emma; "but that is
nothing extraordinary.  I have not the least idea of his being
a weak young man:  I feel sure that he is not.  Mr. Weston would
not be blind to folly, though in his own son; but he is very likely
to have a more yielding, complying, mild disposition than would suit
your notions of man's perfection.  I dare say he has; and though
it may cut him off from some advantages, it will secure him many others."
"Yes; all the advantages of sitting still when he ought to move,
and of leading a life of mere idle pleasure, and fancying himself
extremely expert in finding excuses for it.  He can sit down and
write a fine flourishing letter, full of professions and falsehoods,
and persuade himself that he has hit upon the very best method
in the world of preserving peace at home and preventing his father's
having any right to complain.  His letters disgust me."
"Your feelings are singular.  They seem to satisfy every body else."
"I suspect they do not satisfy Mrs. Weston.  They hardly can
satisfy a woman of her good sense and quick feelings:  standing in
a mother's place, but without a mother's affection to blind her. 
It is on her account that attention to Randalls is doubly due,
and she must doubly feel the omission.  Had she been a person
of consequence herself, he would have come I dare say; and it would
not have signified whether he did or no.  Can you think your friend
behindhand in these sort of considerations?  Do you suppose she
does not often say all this to herself?  No, Emma, your amiable
young man can be amiable only in French, not in English.  He may be
very `aimable,' have very good manners, and be very agreeable; but he
can have no English delicacy towards the feelings of other people: 
"Me!--not at all," replied Mr. Knightley, rather displeased; "I do
not want to think ill of him.  I should be as ready to acknowledge
his merits as any other man; but I hear of none, except what are
merely personal; that he is well-grown and good-looking, with smooth,
"Well, if he have nothing else to recommend him, he will be a
treasure at Highbury.  We do not often look upon fine young men,
well-bred and agreeable.  We must not be nice and ask for all
the virtues into the bargain.  Cannot you imagine, Mr. Knightley,
what a sensation his coming will produce?  There will be but one subject
throughout the parishes of Donwell and Highbury; but one interest--
one object of curiosity; it will be all Mr. Frank Churchill;
"You will excuse my being so much over-powered. If I find him
conversable, I shall be glad of his acquaintance; but if he is only
a chattering coxcomb, he will not occupy much of my time or thoughts."
"My idea of him is, that he can adapt his conversation to the taste
of every body, and has the power as well as the wish of being
universally agreeable.  To you, he will talk of farming; to me,
of drawing or music; and so on to every body, having that general
information on all subjects which will enable him to follow the lead,
or take the lead, just as propriety may require, and to speak
"And mine," said Mr. Knightley warmly, "is, that if he turn out any
thing like it, he will be the most insufferable fellow breathing! 
What! at three-and-twenty to be the king of his company--the great man--
the practised politician, who is to read every body's character,
and make every body's talents conduce to the display of his
own superiority; to be dispensing his flatteries around, that he
may make all appear like fools compared with himself!  My dear Emma,
your own good sense could not endure such a puppy when it came
"I will say no more about him," cried Emma, "you turn every
thing to evil.  We are both prejudiced; you against, I for him;
and we have no chance of agreeing till he is really here."
"But I am very much, and without being at all ashamed of it. 
My love for Mr. and Mrs. Weston gives me a decided prejudice in
"He is a person I never think of from one month's end to another,"
said Mr. Knightley, with a degree of vexation, which made Emma
immediately talk of something else, though she could not comprehend
To take a dislike to a young man, only because he appeared to be
of a different disposition from himself, was unworthy the real
liberality of mind which she was always used to acknowledge in him;
for with all the high opinion of himself, which she had often laid
to his charge, she had never before for a moment supposed it could
Emma and Harriet had been walking together one morning, and,
in Emma's opinion, had been talking enough of Mr. Elton for that day. 
She could not think that Harriet's solace or her own sins required more;
and she was therefore industriously getting rid of the subject
as they returned;--but it burst out again when she thought she
had succeeded, and after speaking some time of what the poor must
suffer in winter, and receiving no other answer than a very plaintive--
"Mr. Elton is so good to the poor!" she found something else must be done.
They were just approaching the house where lived Mrs. and Miss Bates. 
She determined to call upon them and seek safety in numbers. 
There was always sufficient reason for such an attention; Mrs. and
Miss Bates loved to be called on, and she knew she was considered
by the very few who presumed ever to see imperfection in her,
as rather negligent in that respect, and as not contributing what she
She had had many a hint from Mr. Knightley and some from her own heart,
as to her deficiency--but none were equal to counteract the persuasion
of its being very disagreeable,--a waste of time--tiresome women--
and all the horror of being in danger of falling in with the second-rate
and third-rate of Highbury, who were calling on them for ever,
and therefore she seldom went near them.  But now she made the sudden
resolution of not passing their door without going in--observing,
as she proposed it to Harriet, that, as well as she could calculate,
they were just now quite safe from any letter from Jane Fairfax.
The house belonged to people in business.  Mrs. and Miss Bates occupied
the drawing-room floor; and there, in the very moderate-sized apartment,
which was every thing to them, the visitors were most cordially
and even gratefully welcomed; the quiet neat old lady, who with her
knitting was seated in the warmest corner, wanting even to give up
her place to Miss Woodhouse, and her more active, talking daughter,
almost ready to overpower them with care and kindness, thanks for
their visit, solicitude for their shoes, anxious inquiries after
Mr. Woodhouse's health, cheerful communications about her mother's,
and sweet-cake from the beaufet--"Mrs. Cole had just been there,
just called in for ten minutes, and had been so good as to sit an
hour with them, and she had taken a piece of cake and been so kind
as to say she liked it very much; and, therefore, she hoped Miss
Woodhouse and Miss Smith would do them the favour to eat a piece too."
The mention of the Coles was sure to be followed by that of Mr. Elton. 
There was intimacy between them, and Mr. Cole had heard from
Mr. Elton since his going away.  Emma knew what was coming; they must
have the letter over again, and settle how long he had been gone,
and how much he was engaged in company, and what a favourite he
was wherever he went, and how full the Master of the Ceremonies'
ball had been; and she went through it very well, with all the
interest and all the commendation that could be requisite, and always
putting forward to prevent Harriet's being obliged to say a word.
This she had been prepared for when she entered the house;
but meant, having once talked him handsomely over, to be no farther
incommoded by any troublesome topic, and to wander at large amongst
all the Mistresses and Misses of Highbury, and their card-parties.
She had not been prepared to have Jane Fairfax succeed Mr. Elton;
but he was actually hurried off by Miss Bates, she jumped away
from him at last abruptly to the Coles, to usher in a letter from
"Oh! yes--Mr. Elton, I understand--certainly as to dancing--
Mrs. Cole was telling me that dancing at the rooms at Bath was--
Mrs. Cole was so kind as to sit some time with us, talking of Jane;
for as soon as she came in, she began inquiring after her,
Jane is so very great a favourite there.  Whenever she is with us,
Mrs. Cole does not know how to shew her kindness enough;
and I must say that Jane deserves it as much as any body can. 
And so she began inquiring after her directly, saying, `I know you
cannot have heard from Jane lately, because it is not her time
for writing;' and when I immediately said, `But indeed we have,
we had a letter this very morning,' I do not know that I ever saw
any body more surprized.  `Have you, upon your honour?' said she;
`well, that is quite unexpected.  Do let me hear what she says.'"
Emma's politeness was at hand directly, to say, with smiling interest--
"Have you heard from Miss Fairfax so lately?  I am extremely happy. 
"Thank you.  You are so kind!" replied the happily deceived aunt,
while eagerly hunting for the letter.--"Oh! here it is.  I was sure
it could not be far off; but I had put my huswife upon it, you see,
without being aware, and so it was quite hid, but I had it in my hand
so very lately that I was almost sure it must be on the table. 
I was reading it to Mrs. Cole, and since she went away, I was
reading it again to my mother, for it is such a pleasure to her--
a letter from Jane--that she can never hear it often enough;
so I knew it could not be far off, and here it is, only just under
my huswife--and since you are so kind as to wish to hear what
she says;--but, first of all, I really must, in justice to Jane,
apologise for her writing so short a letter--only two pages you see--
hardly two--and in general she fills the whole paper and crosses half. 
My mother often wonders that I can make it out so well. 
She often says, when the letter is first opened, `Well, Hetty,
now I think you will be put to it to make out all that checker-work'--
don't you, ma'am?--And then I tell her, I am sure she would contrive
to make it out herself, if she had nobody to do it for her--
every word of it--I am sure she would pore over it till she had
made out every word.  And, indeed, though my mother's eyes are not
so good as they were, she can see amazingly well still, thank God!
with the help of spectacles.  It is such a blessing!  My mother's
are really very good indeed.  Jane often says, when she is here,
`I am sure, grandmama, you must have had very strong eyes to see
as you do--and so much fine work as you have done too!--I only wish
All this spoken extremely fast obliged Miss Bates to stop for breath;
and Emma said something very civil about the excellence of Miss
"You are extremely kind," replied Miss Bates, highly gratified;
"you who are such a judge, and write so beautifully yourself. 
I am sure there is nobody's praise that could give us so much pleasure
as Miss Woodhouse's. My mother does not hear; she is a little deaf
you know.  Ma'am," addressing her, "do you hear what Miss Woodhouse
And Emma had the advantage of hearing her own silly compliment
repeated twice over before the good old lady could comprehend it. 
She was pondering, in the meanwhile, upon the possibility, without seeming
very rude, of making her escape from Jane Fairfax's letter, and had
almost resolved on hurrying away directly under some slight excuse,
when Miss Bates turned to her again and seized her attention.
"My mother's deafness is very trifling you see--just nothing at all. 
By only raising my voice, and saying any thing two or three times over,
she is sure to hear; but then she is used to my voice.  But it is very
remarkable that she should always hear Jane better than she does me. 
Jane speaks so distinct!  However, she will not find her grandmama
at all deafer than she was two years ago; which is saying a great
deal at my mother's time of life--and it really is full two years,
you know, since she was here.  We never were so long without seeing
her before, and as I was telling Mrs. Cole, we shall hardly know
"Thank you.  You are very kind.  Yes, next week.  Every body is
so surprized; and every body says the same obliging things.  I am
sure she will be as happy to see her friends at Highbury, as they
can be to see her.  Yes, Friday or Saturday; she cannot say which,
because Colonel Campbell will be wanting the carriage himself one
of those days.  So very good of them to send her the whole way! 
But they always do, you know.  Oh yes, Friday or Saturday next. 
That is what she writes about.  That is the reason of her writing out
of rule, as we call it; for, in the common course, we should not have
"Yes, so I imagined.  I was afraid there could be little chance
"So obliging of you!  No, we should not have heard, if it had not
been for this particular circumstance, of her being to come here
so soon.  My mother is so delighted!--for she is to be three months
with us at least.  Three months, she says so, positively, as I
am going to have the pleasure of reading to you.  The case is,
you see, that the Campbells are going to Ireland.  Mrs. Dixon has
persuaded her father and mother to come over and see her directly. 
They had not intended to go over till the summer, but she is so
impatient to see them again--for till she married, last October,
she was never away from them so much as a week, which must make
it very strange to be in different kingdoms, I was going to say,
but however different countries, and so she wrote a very urgent letter
to her mother--or her father, I declare I do not know which it was,
but we shall see presently in Jane's letter--wrote in Mr. Dixon's
name as well as her own, to press their coming over directly,
and they would give them the meeting in Dublin, and take them back
to their country seat, Baly-craig, a beautiful place, I fancy. 
Jane has heard a great deal of its beauty; from Mr. Dixon, I mean--
I do not know that she ever heard about it from any body else;
but it was very natural, you know, that he should like to speak
of his own place while he was paying his addresses--and as Jane used
to be very often walking out with them--for Colonel and Mrs. Campbell
were very particular about their daughter's not walking out
often with only Mr. Dixon, for which I do not at all blame them;
of course she heard every thing he might be telling Miss Campbell
about his own home in Ireland; and I think she wrote us word
that he had shewn them some drawings of the place, views that he
had taken himself.  He is a most amiable, charming young man,
I believe.  Jane was quite longing to go to Ireland, from his account
At this moment, an ingenious and animating suspicion entering
Emma's brain with regard to Jane Fairfax, this charming Mr. Dixon,
and the not going to Ireland, she said, with the insidious design
"You must feel it very fortunate that Miss Fairfax should be allowed
to come to you at such a time.  Considering the very particular
friendship between her and Mrs. Dixon, you could hardly have expected
her to be excused from accompanying Colonel and Mrs. Campbell."
"Very true, very true, indeed.  The very thing that we have always
been rather afraid of; for we should not have liked to have her
at such a distance from us, for months together--not able to come
if any thing was to happen.  But you see, every thing turns out
for the best.  They want her (Mr. and Mrs. Dixon) excessively to
come over with Colonel and Mrs. Campbell; quite depend upon it;
nothing can be more kind or pressing than their joint invitation,
Jane says, as you will hear presently; Mr. Dixon does not seem in the
least backward in any attention.  He is a most charming young man. 
Ever since the service he rendered Jane at Weymouth, when they were
out in that party on the water, and she, by the sudden whirling
round of something or other among the sails, would have been dashed
into the sea at once, and actually was all but gone, if he had not,
with the greatest presence of mind, caught hold of her habit--
(I can never think of it without trembling!)--But ever since we
had the history of that day, I have been so fond of Mr. Dixon!"
"But, in spite of all her friends' urgency, and her own wish
of seeing Ireland, Miss Fairfax prefers devoting the time to you
"Yes--entirely her own doing, entirely her own choice; and Colonel
and Mrs. Campbell think she does quite right, just what they
should recommend; and indeed they particularly wish her to try
her native air, as she has not been quite so well as usual lately."
"I am concerned to hear of it.  I think they judge wisely. 
But Mrs. Dixon must be very much disappointed.  Mrs. Dixon,
I understand, has no remarkable degree of personal beauty; is not,
"Oh! no.  You are very obliging to say such things--but certainly not. 
There is no comparison between them.  Miss Campbell always was
absolutely plain--but extremely elegant and amiable."
"Jane caught a bad cold, poor thing! so long ago as the 7th
of November, (as I am going to read to you,) and has never been
well since.  A long time, is not it, for a cold to hang upon her? 
She never mentioned it before, because she would not alarm us. 
Just like her! so considerate!--But however, she is so far from well,
that her kind friends the Campbells think she had better come home,
and try an air that always agrees with her; and they have no doubt
that three or four months at Highbury will entirely cure her--
and it is certainly a great deal better that she should come here,
than go to Ireland, if she is unwell. Nobody could nurse her, as we
"It appears to me the most desirable arrangement in the world."
"And so she is to come to us next Friday or Saturday, and the
Campbells leave town in their way to Holyhead the Monday following--
as you will find from Jane's letter.  So sudden!--You may guess,
dear Miss Woodhouse, what a flurry it has thrown me in! 
If it was not for the drawback of her illness--but I am afraid
we must expect to see her grown thin, and looking very poorly. 
I must tell you what an unlucky thing happened to me, as to that. 
I always make a point of reading Jane's letters through to myself first,
before I read them aloud to my mother, you know, for fear of there
being any thing in them to distress her.  Jane desired me to do it,
so I always do:  and so I began to-day with my usual caution;
but no sooner did I come to the mention of her being unwell, than I
burst out, quite frightened, with `Bless me! poor Jane is ill!'--
which my mother, being on the watch, heard distinctly, and was sadly
alarmed at.  However, when I read on, I found it was not near so bad
as I had fancied at first; and I make so light of it now to her,
that she does not think much about it.  But I cannot imagine
how I could be so off my guard.  If Jane does not get well soon,
we will call in Mr. Perry.  The expense shall not be thought of;
and though he is so liberal, and so fond of Jane that I dare say
he would not mean to charge any thing for attendance, we could not
suffer it to be so, you know.  He has a wife and family to maintain,
and is not to be giving away his time.  Well, now I have just given you
a hint of what Jane writes about, we will turn to her letter, and I am
sure she tells her own story a great deal better than I can tell it
"I am afraid we must be running away," said Emma, glancing at Harriet,
and beginning to rise--"My father will be expecting us. 
I had no intention, I thought I had no power of staying more than
five minutes, when I first entered the house.  I merely called,
because I would not pass the door without inquiring after Mrs. Bates;
but I have been so pleasantly detained!  Now, however, we must wish
And not all that could be urged to detain her succeeded. 
She regained the street--happy in this, that though much had been
forced on her against her will, though she had in fact heard
the whole substance of Jane Fairfax's letter, she had been able
Jane Fairfax was an orphan, the only child of Mrs. Bates's
The marriage of Lieut. Fairfax of the _______ regiment of infantry,
and Miss Jane Bates, had had its day of fame and pleasure,
hope and interest; but nothing now remained of it, save the melancholy
remembrance of him dying in action abroad--of his widow sinking
under consumption and grief soon afterwards--and this girl.
By birth she belonged to Highbury:  and when at three years old,
on losing her mother, she became the property, the charge,
the consolation, the fondling of her grandmother and aunt, there had
seemed every probability of her being permanently fixed there;
of her being taught only what very limited means could command,
and growing up with no advantages of connexion or improvement,
to be engrafted on what nature had given her in a pleasing person,
good understanding, and warm-hearted, well-meaning relations.
But the compassionate feelings of a friend of her father gave
a change to her destiny.  This was Colonel Campbell, who had
very highly regarded Fairfax, as an excellent officer and most
deserving young man; and farther, had been indebted to him for
such attentions, during a severe camp-fever, as he believed had saved
his life.  These were claims which he did not learn to overlook,
though some years passed away from the death of poor Fairfax,
before his own return to England put any thing in his power. 
When he did return, he sought out the child and took notice of her. 
He was a married man, with only one living child, a girl,
about Jane's age:  and Jane became their guest, paying them long visits
and growing a favourite with all; and before she was nine years old,
his daughter's great fondness for her, and his own wish of being
a real friend, united to produce an offer from Colonel Campbell
of undertaking the whole charge of her education.  It was accepted;
and from that period Jane had belonged to Colonel Campbell's family,
and had lived with them entirely, only visiting her grandmother
The plan was that she should be brought up for educating others;
the very few hundred pounds which she inherited from her father
making independence impossible.  To provide for her otherwise
was out of Colonel Campbell's power; for though his income, by pay
and appointments, was handsome, his fortune was moderate and must
be all his daughter's; but, by giving her an education, he hoped
to be supplying the means of respectable subsistence hereafter.
Such was Jane Fairfax's history.  She had fallen into good hands,
known nothing but kindness from the Campbells, and been given
an excellent education.  Living constantly with right-minded
and well-informed people, her heart and understanding had received
every advantage of discipline and culture; and Colonel Campbell's
residence being in London, every lighter talent had been done
full justice to, by the attendance of first-rate masters. 
Her disposition and abilities were equally worthy of all that
friendship could do; and at eighteen or nineteen she was, as far
as such an early age can be qualified for the care of children,
fully competent to the office of instruction herself; but she
was too much beloved to be parted with.  Neither father nor mother
could promote, and the daughter could not endure it.  The evil day
was put off.  It was easy to decide that she was still too young;
and Jane remained with them, sharing, as another daughter, in all
the rational pleasures of an elegant society, and a judicious
mixture of home and amusement, with only the drawback of the future,
the sobering suggestions of her own good understanding to remind
The affection of the whole family, the warm attachment of Miss
Campbell in particular, was the more honourable to each party
from the circumstance of Jane's decided superiority both in beauty
and acquirements.  That nature had given it in feature could not
be unseen by the young woman, nor could her higher powers of mind
be unfelt by the parents.  They continued together with unabated
regard however, till the marriage of Miss Campbell, who by that chance,
that luck which so often defies anticipation in matrimonial affairs,
giving attraction to what is moderate rather than to what is superior,
engaged the affections of Mr. Dixon, a young man, rich and agreeable,
almost as soon as they were acquainted; and was eligibly
and happily settled, while Jane Fairfax had yet her bread to earn.
This event had very lately taken place; too lately for any thing to be
yet attempted by her less fortunate friend towards entering on her path
of duty; though she had now reached the age which her own judgment
had fixed on for beginning.  She had long resolved that one-and-twenty
should be the period.  With the fortitude of a devoted novitiate,
she had resolved at one-and-twenty to complete the sacrifice,
and retire from all the pleasures of life, of rational intercourse,
equal society, peace and hope, to penance and mortification for ever.
The good sense of Colonel and Mrs. Campbell could not oppose such
a resolution, though their feelings did.  As long as they lived,
no exertions would be necessary, their home might be hers for ever;
and for their own comfort they would have retained her wholly;
but this would be selfishness:--what must be at last, had better
be soon.  Perhaps they began to feel it might have been kinder
and wiser to have resisted the temptation of any delay, and spared
her from a taste of such enjoyments of ease and leisure as must
now be relinquished.  Still, however, affection was glad to catch
at any reasonable excuse for not hurrying on the wretched moment. 
She had never been quite well since the time of their daughter's marriage;
and till she should have completely recovered her usual strength,
they must forbid her engaging in duties, which, so far from being
compatible with a weakened frame and varying spirits, seemed,
under the most favourable circumstances, to require something
more than human perfection of body and mind to be discharged with
With regard to her not accompanying them to Ireland, her account
to her aunt contained nothing but truth, though there might be some
truths not told.  It was her own choice to give the time of their
absence to Highbury; to spend, perhaps, her last months of perfect
liberty with those kind relations to whom she was so very dear: 
and the Campbells, whatever might be their motive or motives,
whether single, or double, or treble, gave the arrangement
their ready sanction, and said, that they depended more on a few
months spent in her native air, for the recovery of her health,
than on any thing else.  Certain it was that she was to come;
and that Highbury, instead of welcoming that perfect novelty which
had been so long promised it--Mr. Frank Churchill--must put up for
the present with Jane Fairfax, who could bring only the freshness
Emma was sorry;--to have to pay civilities to a person she did
not like through three long months!--to be always doing more than
she wished, and less than she ought!  Why she did not like Jane
Fairfax might be a difficult question to answer; Mr. Knightley
had once told her it was because she saw in her the really
accomplished young woman, which she wanted to be thought herself;
and though the accusation had been eagerly refuted at the time,
there were moments of self-examination in which her conscience could
not quite acquit her.  But "she could never get acquainted with her: 
she did not know how it was, but there was such coldness and reserve--
such apparent indifference whether she pleased or not--and then,
her aunt was such an eternal talker!--and she was made such a fuss
with by every body!--and it had been always imagined that they were
to be so intimate--because their ages were the same, every body had
supposed they must be so fond of each other."  These were her reasons--
It was a dislike so little just--every imputed fault was so magnified
by fancy, that she never saw Jane Fairfax the first time after any
considerable absence, without feeling that she had injured her;
and now, when the due visit was paid, on her arrival, after a two years'
interval, she was particularly struck with the very appearance
and manners, which for those two whole years she had been depreciating. 
Jane Fairfax was very elegant, remarkably elegant; and she had
herself the highest value for elegance.  Her height was pretty,
just such as almost every body would think tall, and nobody could
think very tall; her figure particularly graceful; her size a most
becoming medium, between fat and thin, though a slight appearance
of ill-health seemed to point out the likeliest evil of the two. 
Emma could not but feel all this; and then, her face--her features--
there was more beauty in them altogether than she had remembered;
it was not regular, but it was very pleasing beauty.  Her eyes,
a deep grey, with dark eye-lashes and eyebrows, had never been denied
their praise; but the skin, which she had been used to cavil at,
as wanting colour, had a clearness and delicacy which really needed
no fuller bloom.  It was a style of beauty, of which elegance
was the reigning character, and as such, she must, in honour,
by all her principles, admire it:--elegance, which, whether of person
or of mind, she saw so little in Highbury.  There, not to be vulgar,
In short, she sat, during the first visit, looking at Jane Fairfax
with twofold complacency; the sense of pleasure and the sense
of rendering justice, and was determining that she would dislike
her no longer.  When she took in her history, indeed, her situation,
as well as her beauty; when she considered what all this elegance
was destined to, what she was going to sink from, how she was going
to live, it seemed impossible to feel any thing but compassion
and respect; especially, if to every well-known particular entitling
her to interest, were added the highly probable circumstance
of an attachment to Mr. Dixon, which she had so naturally started
to herself.  In that case, nothing could be more pitiable
or more honourable than the sacrifices she had resolved on. 
Emma was very willing now to acquit her of having seduced
Mr. Dixon's actions from his wife, or of any thing mischievous
which her imagination had suggested at first.  If it were love,
it might be simple, single, successless love on her side alone. 
She might have been unconsciously sucking in the sad poison,
while a sharer of his conversation with her friend; and from the best,
the purest of motives, might now be denying herself this visit
to Ireland, and resolving to divide herself effectually from
him and his connexions by soon beginning her career of laborious duty.
Upon the whole, Emma left her with such softened, charitable feelings,
as made her look around in walking home, and lament that Highbury
afforded no young man worthy of giving her independence;
nobody that she could wish to scheme about for her.
These were charming feelings--but not lasting.  Before she had
committed herself by any public profession of eternal friendship for
Jane Fairfax, or done more towards a recantation of past prejudices
and errors, than saying to Mr. Knightley, "She certainly is handsome;
she is better than handsome!"  Jane had spent an evening at Hartfield
with her grandmother and aunt, and every thing was relapsing much
into its usual state.  Former provocations reappeared.  The aunt
was as tiresome as ever; more tiresome, because anxiety for her
health was now added to admiration of her powers; and they had to
listen to the description of exactly how little bread and butter
she ate for breakfast, and how small a slice of mutton for dinner,
as well as to see exhibitions of new caps and new workbags for her
mother and herself; and Jane's offences rose again.  They had music;
Emma was obliged to play; and the thanks and praise which necessarily
followed appeared to her an affectation of candour, an air
of greatness, meaning only to shew off in higher style her own very
superior performance.  She was, besides, which was the worst of all,
so cold, so cautious!  There was no getting at her real opinion. 
Wrapt up in a cloak of politeness, she seemed determined
to hazard nothing.  She was disgustingly, was suspiciously reserved.
If any thing could be more, where all was most, she was more
reserved on the subject of Weymouth and the Dixons than any thing. 
She seemed bent on giving no real insight into Mr. Dixon's character,
or her own value for his company, or opinion of the suitableness
of the match.  It was all general approbation and smoothness;
nothing delineated or distinguished.  It did her no service however. 
Her caution was thrown away.  Emma saw its artifice, and returned
to her first surmises.  There probably was something more to conceal
than her own preference; Mr. Dixon, perhaps, had been very near
changing one friend for the other, or been fixed only to Miss Campbell,
for the sake of the future twelve thousand pounds.
The like reserve prevailed on other topics.  She and Mr. Frank Churchill
had been at Weymouth at the same time.  It was known that they were
a little acquainted; but not a syllable of real information could Emma
procure as to what he truly was.  "Was he handsome?"--"She believed
he was reckoned a very fine young man."  "Was he agreeable?"--
"He was generally thought so."  "Did he appear a sensible young man;
a young man of information?"--"At a watering-place, or in a common
London acquaintance, it was difficult to decide on such points. 
Manners were all that could be safely judged of, under a much longer
knowledge than they had yet had of Mr. Churchill.  She believed
every body found his manners pleasing."  Emma could not forgive her.
Emma could not forgive her;--but as neither provocation nor resentment
were discerned by Mr. Knightley, who had been of the party, and had
seen only proper attention and pleasing behaviour on each side,
he was expressing the next morning, being at Hartfield again on
business with Mr. Woodhouse, his approbation of the whole; not so
openly as he might have done had her father been out of the room,
but speaking plain enough to be very intelligible to Emma. 
He had been used to think her unjust to Jane, and had now great
"A very pleasant evening," he began, as soon as Mr. Woodhouse
had been talked into what was necessary, told that he understood,
and the papers swept away;--"particularly pleasant.  You and Miss
Fairfax gave us some very good music.  I do not know a more
luxurious state, sir, than sitting at one's ease to be entertained
a whole evening by two such young women; sometimes with music
and sometimes with conversation.  I am sure Miss Fairfax must
have found the evening pleasant, Emma.  You left nothing undone. 
I was glad you made her play so much, for having no instrument
at her grandmother's, it must have been a real indulgence."
"I am happy you approved," said Emma, smiling; "but I hope I am
not often deficient in what is due to guests at Hartfield."
"No, my dear," said her father instantly; "that I am sure you
are not.  There is nobody half so attentive and civil as you are. 
If any thing, you are too attentive.  The muffin last night--if it
had been handed round once, I think it would have been enough."
"No," said Mr. Knightley, nearly at the same time; "you are not
often deficient; not often deficient either in manner or comprehension. 
An arch look expressed--"I understand you well enough;" but she
"I always told you she was--a little; but you will soon overcome
all that part of her reserve which ought to be overcome, all that
has its foundation in diffidence.  What arises from discretion
"My dear Emma," said he, moving from his chair into one close
by her, "you are not going to tell me, I hope, that you
"Oh! no; I was pleased with my own perseverance in asking questions;
and amused to think how little information I obtained."
"I hope every body had a pleasant evening," said Mr. Woodhouse,
in his quiet way.  "I had.  Once, I felt the fire rather too much;
but then I moved back my chair a little, a very little, and it did
not disturb me.  Miss Bates was very chatty and good-humoured,
as she always is, though she speaks rather too quick.  However,
she is very agreeable, and Mrs. Bates too, in a different way. 
I like old friends; and Miss Jane Fairfax is a very pretty sort of
young lady, a very pretty and a very well-behaved young lady indeed. 
She must have found the evening agreeable, Mr. Knightley, because she
"True, sir; and Emma, because she had Miss Fairfax."
Emma saw his anxiety, and wishing to appease it, at least for
the present, said, and with a sincerity which no one could question--
"She is a sort of elegant creature that one cannot keep one's eyes from. 
I am always watching her to admire; and I do pity her from my heart."
Mr. Knightley looked as if he were more gratified than he cared
to express; and before he could make any reply, Mr. Woodhouse,
"It is a great pity that their circumstances should be so confined!
a great pity indeed! and I have often wished--but it is so little one
can venture to do--small, trifling presents, of any thing uncommon--
Now we have killed a porker, and Emma thinks of sending them
a loin or a leg; it is very small and delicate--Hartfield pork is
not like any other pork--but still it is pork--and, my dear Emma,
unless one could be sure of their making it into steaks, nicely fried,
as ours are fried, without the smallest grease, and not roast it,
for no stomach can bear roast pork--I think we had better send the leg--
"My dear papa, I sent the whole hind-quarter. I knew you would wish it. 
There will be the leg to be salted, you know, which is so very nice,
and the loin to be dressed directly in any manner they like."
"That's right, my dear, very right.  I had not thought of it before,
but that is the best way.  They must not over-salt the leg; and then,
if it is not over-salted, and if it is very thoroughly boiled,
just as Serle boils ours, and eaten very moderately of, with a
boiled turnip, and a little carrot or parsnip, I do not consider
"Emma," said Mr. Knightley presently, "I have a piece of news for you. 
You like news--and I heard an article in my way hither that I think
"News!  Oh! yes, I always like news.  What is it?--why do you
"No, not at Randalls; I have not been near Randalls," when the door
was thrown open, and Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax walked into the room. 
Full of thanks, and full of news, Miss Bates knew not which to
give quickest.  Mr. Knightley soon saw that he had lost his moment,
and that not another syllable of communication could rest with him.
"Oh! my dear sir, how are you this morning?  My dear Miss Woodhouse--
I come quite over-powered. Such a beautiful hind-quarter of pork! 
You are too bountiful!  Have you heard the news?  Mr. Elton is going
Emma had not had time even to think of Mr. Elton, and she was
so completely surprized that she could not avoid a little start,
"There is my news:--I thought it would interest you,"
said Mr. Knightley, with a smile which implied a conviction
"But where could you hear it?" cried Miss Bates.  "Where could
you possibly hear it, Mr. Knightley?  For it is not five minutes
since I received Mrs. Cole's note--no, it cannot be more than five--
or at least ten--for I had got my bonnet and spencer on, just ready
to come out--I was only gone down to speak to Patty again about
the pork--Jane was standing in the passage--were not you, Jane?--
for my mother was so afraid that we had not any salting-pan
large enough.  So I said I would go down and see, and Jane said,
`Shall I go down instead? for I think you have a little cold,
and Patty has been washing the kitchen.'--`Oh! my dear,'
said I--well, and just then came the note.  A Miss Hawkins--
that's all I know.  A Miss Hawkins of Bath.  But, Mr. Knightley,
how could you possibly have heard it? for the very moment Mr. Cole
told Mrs. Cole of it, she sat down and wrote to me.  A Miss Hawkins--"
"I was with Mr. Cole on business an hour and a half ago. 
He had just read Elton's letter as I was shewn in, and handed it
"Well! that is quite--I suppose there never was a piece of news more
generally interesting.  My dear sir, you really are too bountiful. 
My mother desires her very best compliments and regards, and a
thousand thanks, and says you really quite oppress her."
"We consider our Hartfield pork," replied Mr. Woodhouse--"indeed it
certainly is, so very superior to all other pork, that Emma and I
"Oh! my dear sir, as my mother says, our friends are only too good
to us.  If ever there were people who, without having great wealth
themselves, had every thing they could wish for, I am sure it is us. 
We may well say that `our lot is cast in a goodly heritage.' 
Well, Mr. Knightley, and so you actually saw the letter; well--"
"It was short--merely to announce--but cheerful, exulting, of course."--
Here was a sly glance at Emma.  "He had been so fortunate as to--
I forget the precise words--one has no business to remember them. 
The information was, as you state, that he was going to be married
to a Miss Hawkins.  By his style, I should imagine it just settled."
"Mr. Elton going to be married!" said Emma, as soon as she could speak. 
"He will have every body's wishes for his happiness."
"He is very young to settle," was Mr. Woodhouse's observation. 
"He had better not be in a hurry.  He seemed to me very well off
as he was.  We were always glad to see him at Hartfield."
"A new neighbour for us all, Miss Woodhouse!" said Miss Bates,
joyfully; "my mother is so pleased!--she says she cannot
bear to have the poor old Vicarage without a mistress. 
This is great news, indeed.  Jane, you have never seen
Mr. Elton!--no wonder that you have such a curiosity to see him."
Jane's curiosity did not appear of that absorbing nature as wholly
"No--I have never seen Mr. Elton," she replied, starting on this appeal;
"Who shall answer that question?" cried Emma.  "My father would
say `yes,' Mr. Knightley `no;' and Miss Bates and I that he is
just the happy medium.  When you have been here a little longer,
Miss Fairfax, you will understand that Mr. Elton is the standard
of perfection in Highbury, both in person and mind."
"Very true, Miss Woodhouse, so she will.  He is the very best
young man--But, my dear Jane, if you remember, I told you yesterday
he was precisely the height of Mr. Perry.  Miss Hawkins,--I dare say,
an excellent young woman.  His extreme attention to my mother--
wanting her to sit in the vicarage pew, that she might hear the better,
for my mother is a little deaf, you know--it is not much, but she
does not hear quite quick.  Jane says that Colonel Campbell is a
little deaf.  He fancied bathing might be good for it--the warm bath--
but she says it did him no lasting benefit.  Colonel Campbell,
you know, is quite our angel.  And Mr. Dixon seems a very charming
young man, quite worthy of him.  It is such a happiness when good
people get together--and they always do.  Now, here will be Mr. Elton
and Miss Hawkins; and there are the Coles, such very good people;
and the Perrys--I suppose there never was a happier or a better couple
than Mr. and Mrs. Perry.  I say, sir," turning to Mr. Woodhouse,
"I think there are few places with such society as Highbury. 
I always say, we are quite blessed in our neighbours.--My dear sir,
if there is one thing my mother loves better than another, it is pork--
"As to who, or what Miss Hawkins is, or how long he has been
acquainted with her," said Emma, "nothing I suppose can be known. 
One feels that it cannot be a very long acquaintance.  He has been
Nobody had any information to give; and, after a few more wonderings,
"You are silent, Miss Fairfax--but I hope you mean to take
an interest in this news.  You, who have been hearing and seeing
so much of late on these subjects, who must have been so deep
in the business on Miss Campbell's account--we shall not excuse
your being indifferent about Mr. Elton and Miss Hawkins."
"When I have seen Mr. Elton," replied Jane, " I dare say I
shall be interested--but I believe it requires that with me. 
And as it is some months since Miss Campbell married, the impression
"Yes, he has been gone just four weeks, as you observe, Miss Woodhouse,"
said Miss Bates, "four weeks yesterday.--A Miss Hawkins!--Well, I had
always rather fancied it would be some young lady hereabouts;
not that I ever--Mrs. Cole once whispered to me--but I immediately said,
`No, Mr. Elton is a most worthy young man--but'--In short, I do
not think I am particularly quick at those sort of discoveries. 
I do not pretend to it.  What is before me, I see.  At the same time,
nobody could wonder if Mr. Elton should have aspired--Miss Woodhouse
lets me chatter on, so good-humouredly. She knows I would not
offend for the world.  How does Miss Smith do?  She seems quite
recovered now.  Have you heard from Mrs. John Knightley lately? 
Oh! those dear little children.  Jane, do you know I always fancy
Mr. Dixon like Mr. John Knightley.  I mean in person--tall, and with
"Quite wrong, my dear aunt; there is no likeness at all."
"Very odd! but one never does form a just idea of any body beforehand. 
One takes up a notion, and runs away with it.  Mr. Dixon, you say,
"Handsome!  Oh! no--far from it--certainly plain.  I told you he
"My dear, you said that Miss Campbell would not allow him to be plain,
"Oh! as for me, my judgment is worth nothing.  Where I have a regard,
I always think a person well-looking. But I gave what I believed
"Well, my dear Jane, I believe we must be running away. 
The weather does not look well, and grandmama will be uneasy. 
You are too obliging, my dear Miss Woodhouse; but we really must
take leave.  This has been a most agreeable piece of news indeed. 
I shall just go round by Mrs. Cole's; but I shall not stop three minutes: 
and, Jane, you had better go home directly--I would not have you
out in a shower!--We think she is the better for Highbury already. 
Thank you, we do indeed.  I shall not attempt calling on Mrs. Goddard,
for I really do not think she cares for any thing but boiled pork: 
when we dress the leg it will be another thing.  Good morning to you,
my dear sir.  Oh!  Mr. Knightley is coming too.  Well, that is
so very!--I am sure if Jane is tired, you will be so kind as to
give her your arm.--Mr. Elton, and Miss Hawkins!--Good morning
Emma, alone with her father, had half her attention wanted by him
while he lamented that young people would be in such a hurry to marry--
and to marry strangers too--and the other half she could give
to her own view of the subject.  It was to herself an amusing
and a very welcome piece of news, as proving that Mr. Elton
could not have suffered long; but she was sorry for Harriet: 
Harriet must feel it--and all that she could hope was, by giving
the first information herself, to save her from hearing it abruptly
from others.  It was now about the time that she was likely to call. 
If she were to meet Miss Bates in her way!--and upon its beginning
to rain, Emma was obliged to expect that the weather would be
detaining her at Mrs. Goddard's, and that the intelligence would
The shower was heavy, but short; and it had not been over five minutes,
when in came Harriet, with just the heated, agitated look which
hurrying thither with a full heart was likely to give; and the
"Oh! Miss Woodhouse, what do you think has happened!" which instantly
burst forth, had all the evidence of corresponding perturbation. 
As the blow was given, Emma felt that she could not now shew greater
kindness than in listening; and Harriet, unchecked, ran eagerly
through what she had to tell.  "She had set out from Mrs. Goddard's
half an hour ago--she had been afraid it would rain--she had been
afraid it would pour down every moment--but she thought she might
get to Hartfield first--she had hurried on as fast as possible;
but then, as she was passing by the house where a young woman
was making up a gown for her, she thought she would just step
in and see how it went on; and though she did not seem to stay
half a moment there, soon after she came out it began to rain,
and she did not know what to do; so she ran on directly, as fast
as she could, and took shelter at Ford's."--Ford's was the principal
woollen-draper, linen-draper, and haberdasher's shop united;
the shop first in size and fashion in the place.--"And so,
there she had set, without an idea of any thing in the world,
full ten minutes, perhaps--when, all of a sudden, who should come in--
to be sure it was so very odd!--but they always dealt at Ford's--
who should come in, but Elizabeth Martin and her brother!--
Dear Miss Woodhouse! only think.  I thought I should have fainted. 
I did not know what to do.  I was sitting near the door--Elizabeth saw
me directly; but he did not; he was busy with the umbrella. 
I am sure she saw me, but she looked away directly, and took
no notice; and they both went to quite the farther end of the shop;
and I kept sitting near the door!--Oh! dear; I was so miserable! 
I am sure I must have been as white as my gown.  I could not go away
you know, because of the rain; but I did so wish myself anywhere
in the world but there.--Oh! dear, Miss Woodhouse--well, at last,
I fancy, he looked round and saw me; for instead of going
on with her buyings, they began whispering to one another. 
I am sure they were talking of me; and I could not help thinking
that he was persuading her to speak to me--(do you think he was,
Miss Woodhouse?)--for presently she came forward--came quite up
to me, and asked me how I did, and seemed ready to shake hands,
if I would.  She did not do any of it in the same way that she used;
I could see she was altered; but, however, she seemed to try to be
very friendly, and we shook hands, and stood talking some time;
but I know no more what I said--I was in such a tremble!--I remember
she said she was sorry we never met now; which I thought almost
too kind!  Dear, Miss Woodhouse, I was absolutely miserable! 
By that time, it was beginning to hold up, and I was determined
that nothing should stop me from getting away--and then--only think!--
I found he was coming up towards me too--slowly you know, and as
if he did not quite know what to do; and so he came and spoke,
and I answered--and I stood for a minute, feeling dreadfully,
you know, one can't tell how; and then I took courage, and said it
did not rain, and I must go; and so off I set; and I had not got
three yards from the door, when he came after me, only to say,
if I was going to Hartfield, he thought I had much better go round
by Mr. Cole's stables, for I should find the near way quite floated
by this rain.  Oh! dear, I thought it would have been the death of me! 
So I said, I was very much obliged to him:  you know I could
not do less; and then he went back to Elizabeth, and I came round
by the stables--I believe I did--but I hardly knew where I was,
or any thing about it.  Oh!  Miss Woodhouse, I would rather done
any thing than have it happen:  and yet, you know, there was a sort
of satisfaction in seeing him behave so pleasantly and so kindly. 
And Elizabeth, too.  Oh!  Miss Woodhouse, do talk to me and make
Very sincerely did Emma wish to do so; but it was not immediately in
her power.  She was obliged to stop and think.  She was not thoroughly
comfortable herself.  The young man's conduct, and his sister's,
seemed the result of real feeling, and she could not but pity them. 
As Harriet described it, there had been an interesting mixture
of wounded affection and genuine delicacy in their behaviour. 
But she had believed them to be well-meaning, worthy people before;
and what difference did this make in the evils of the connexion? 
It was folly to be disturbed by it.  Of course, he must be sorry
to lose her--they must be all sorry.  Ambition, as well as love,
had probably been mortified.  They might all have hoped to rise
by Harriet's acquaintance:  and besides, what was the value of
Harriet's description?--So easily pleased--so little discerning;--
She exerted herself, and did try to make her comfortable,
by considering all that had passed as a mere trifle, and quite
"It might be distressing, for the moment," said she; "but you seem
to have behaved extremely well; and it is over--and may never--
can never, as a first meeting, occur again, and therefore you need
Harriet said, "very true," and she "would not think about it;"
but still she talked of it--still she could talk of nothing else;
and Emma, at last, in order to put the Martins out of her head,
was obliged to hurry on the news, which she had meant to give
with so much tender caution; hardly knowing herself whether
to rejoice or be angry, ashamed or only amused, at such a state
of mind in poor Harriet--such a conclusion of Mr. Elton's importance
Mr. Elton's rights, however, gradually revived.  Though she did not
feel the first intelligence as she might have done the day before,
or an hour before, its interest soon increased; and before their
first conversation was over, she had talked herself into all the
sensations of curiosity, wonder and regret, pain and pleasure,
as to this fortunate Miss Hawkins, which could conduce to place
the Martins under proper subordination in her fancy.
Emma learned to be rather glad that there had been such a meeting. 
It had been serviceable in deadening the first shock, without retaining
any influence to alarm.  As Harriet now lived, the Martins could
not get at her, without seeking her, where hitherto they had wanted
either the courage or the condescension to seek her; for since her
refusal of the brother, the sisters never had been at Mrs. Goddard's;
and a twelvemonth might pass without their being thrown together again,
Human nature is so well disposed towards those who are in
interesting situations, that a young person, who either marries
A week had not passed since Miss Hawkins's name was first
mentioned in Highbury, before she was, by some means or other,
discovered to have every recommendation of person and mind;
to be handsome, elegant, highly accomplished, and perfectly amiable: 
and when Mr. Elton himself arrived to triumph in his happy prospects,
and circulate the fame of her merits, there was very little more
for him to do, than to tell her Christian name, and say whose
Mr. Elton returned, a very happy man.  He had gone away rejected
and mortified--disappointed in a very sanguine hope, after a series
of what appeared to him strong encouragement; and not only losing
the right lady, but finding himself debased to the level of a very
wrong one.  He had gone away deeply offended--he came back engaged
to another--and to another as superior, of course, to the first,
as under such circumstances what is gained always is to what is lost. 
He came back gay and self-satisfied, eager and busy, caring nothing
The charming Augusta Hawkins, in addition to all the usual advantages
of perfect beauty and merit, was in possession of an independent fortune,
of so many thousands as would always be called ten; a point of
some dignity, as well as some convenience:  the story told well;
he had not thrown himself away--he had gained a woman of 10,000 l. 
or thereabouts; and he had gained her with such delightful rapidity--
the first hour of introduction had been so very soon followed by
distinguishing notice; the history which he had to give Mrs. Cole
of the rise and progress of the affair was so glorious--the steps
so quick, from the accidental rencontre, to the dinner at Mr. Green's,
and the party at Mrs. Brown's--smiles and blushes rising in importance--
with consciousness and agitation richly scattered--the lady
had been so easily impressed--so sweetly disposed--had in short,
to use a most intelligible phrase, been so very ready to have him,
He had caught both substance and shadow--both fortune and affection,
and was just the happy man he ought to be; talking only of himself
and his own concerns--expecting to be congratulated--ready to be
laughed at--and, with cordial, fearless smiles, now addressing
all the young ladies of the place, to whom, a few weeks ago,
The wedding was no distant event, as the parties had only themselves
to please, and nothing but the necessary preparations to wait for;
and when he set out for Bath again, there was a general expectation,
which a certain glance of Mrs. Cole's did not seem to contradict,
that when he next entered Highbury he would bring his bride.
During his present short stay, Emma had barely seen him; but just
enough to feel that the first meeting was over, and to give her
the impression of his not being improved by the mixture of pique
and pretension, now spread over his air.  She was, in fact,
beginning very much to wonder that she had ever thought him pleasing
at all; and his sight was so inseparably connected with some very
disagreeable feelings, that, except in a moral light, as a penance,
a lesson, a source of profitable humiliation to her own mind,
she would have been thankful to be assured of never seeing him again. 
She wished him very well; but he gave her pain, and his welfare
twenty miles off would administer most satisfaction.
The pain of his continued residence in Highbury, however, must certainly
be lessened by his marriage.  Many vain solicitudes would be prevented--
many awkwardnesses smoothed by it.  A Mrs. Elton would be an excuse for
any change of intercourse; former intimacy might sink without remark. 
It would be almost beginning their life of civility again.
Of the lady, individually, Emma thought very little.  She was good
enough for Mr. Elton, no doubt; accomplished enough for Highbury--
handsome enough--to look plain, probably, by Harriet's side. 
As to connexion, there Emma was perfectly easy; persuaded,
that after all his own vaunted claims and disdain of Harriet,
he had done nothing.  On that article, truth seemed attainable. 
What she was, must be uncertain; but who she was, might be found out;
and setting aside the 10,000 l., it did not appear that she was at
all Harriet's superior.  She brought no name, no blood, no alliance. 
Miss Hawkins was the youngest of the two daughters of a Bristol--
merchant, of course, he must be called; but, as the whole of the
profits of his mercantile life appeared so very moderate, it was
not unfair to guess the dignity of his line of trade had been very
moderate also.  Part of every winter she had been used to spend in Bath;
but Bristol was her home, the very heart of Bristol; for though
the father and mother had died some years ago, an uncle remained--
in the law line--nothing more distinctly honourable was hazarded
of him, than that he was in the law line; and with him the daughter
had lived.  Emma guessed him to be the drudge of some attorney,
and too stupid to rise.  And all the grandeur of the connexion
seemed dependent on the elder sister, who was very well married,
to a gentleman in a great way, near Bristol, who kept two carriages! 
That was the wind-up of the history; that was the glory of
Could she but have given Harriet her feelings about it all! 
She had talked her into love; but, alas! she was not so easily to be
talked out of it.  The charm of an object to occupy the many vacancies
of Harriet's mind was not to be talked away.  He might be superseded
by another; he certainly would indeed; nothing could be clearer;
even a Robert Martin would have been sufficient; but nothing else,
she feared, would cure her.  Harriet was one of those, who,
having once begun, would be always in love.  And now, poor girl!
she was considerably worse from this reappearance of Mr. Elton. 
She was always having a glimpse of him somewhere or other.  Emma saw
him only once; but two or three times every day Harriet was sure
just to meet with him, or just to miss him, just to hear his voice,
or see his shoulder, just to have something occur to preserve him
in her fancy, in all the favouring warmth of surprize and conjecture. 
She was, moreover, perpetually hearing about him; for, excepting when
at Hartfield, she was always among those who saw no fault in Mr. Elton,
and found nothing so interesting as the discussion of his concerns;
and every report, therefore, every guess--all that had already
occurred, all that might occur in the arrangement of his affairs,
comprehending income, servants, and furniture, was continually
in agitation around her.  Her regard was receiving strength by
invariable praise of him, and her regrets kept alive, and feelings
irritated by ceaseless repetitions of Miss Hawkins's happiness,
and continual observation of, how much he seemed attached!--
his air as he walked by the house--the very sitting of his hat,
Had it been allowable entertainment, had there been no pain
to her friend, or reproach to herself, in the waverings of
Harriet's mind, Emma would have been amused by its variations. 
Sometimes Mr. Elton predominated, sometimes the Martins; and each
was occasionally useful as a check to the other.  Mr. Elton's
engagement had been the cure of the agitation of meeting Mr. Martin. 
The unhappiness produced by the knowledge of that engagement had been
a little put aside by Elizabeth Martin's calling at Mrs. Goddard's
a few days afterwards.  Harriet had not been at home; but a note had
been prepared and left for her, written in the very style to touch;
a small mixture of reproach, with a great deal of kindness;
and till Mr. Elton himself appeared, she had been much occupied
by it, continually pondering over what could be done in return,
and wishing to do more than she dared to confess.  But Mr. Elton,
in person, had driven away all such cares.  While he staid,
the Martins were forgotten; and on the very morning of his setting off
for Bath again, Emma, to dissipate some of the distress it occasioned,
judged it best for her to return Elizabeth Martin's visit.
How that visit was to be acknowledged--what would be necessary--
and what might be safest, had been a point of some doubtful
consideration.  Absolute neglect of the mother and sisters,
when invited to come, would be ingratitude.  It must not be: 
and yet the danger of a renewal of the acquaintance!--
After much thinking, she could determine on nothing better, than Harriet's
returning the visit; but in a way that, if they had understanding,
should convince them that it was to be only a formal acquaintance. 
She meant to take her in the carriage, leave her at the Abbey Mill,
while she drove a little farther, and call for her again so soon,
as to allow no time for insidious applications or dangerous
recurrences to the past, and give the most decided proof of what
She could think of nothing better:  and though there was something
in it which her own heart could not approve--something of ingratitude,
merely glossed over--it must be done, or what would become of Harriet?
Small heart had Harriet for visiting.  Only half an hour before her
friend called for her at Mrs. Goddard's, her evil stars had led
her to the very spot where, at that moment, a trunk, directed to
The Rev. Philip Elton, White-Hart, Bath, was to be seen under the
operation of being lifted into the butcher's cart, which was to
convey it to where the coaches past; and every thing in this world,
excepting that trunk and the direction, was consequently a blank.
She went, however; and when they reached the farm, and she was to
be put down, at the end of the broad, neat gravel walk, which led
between espalier apple-trees to the front door, the sight of every
thing which had given her so much pleasure the autumn before,
was beginning to revive a little local agitation; and when they parted,
Emma observed her to be looking around with a sort of fearful curiosity,
which determined her not to allow the visit to exceed the proposed
quarter of an hour.  She went on herself, to give that portion
of time to an old servant who was married, and settled in Donwell.
The quarter of an hour brought her punctually to the white gate again;
and Miss Smith receiving her summons, was with her without delay,
and unattended by any alarming young man.  She came solitarily
down the gravel walk--a Miss Martin just appearing at the door,
and parting with her seemingly with ceremonious civility.
Harriet could not very soon give an intelligible account. 
She was feeling too much; but at last Emma collected from her
enough to understand the sort of meeting, and the sort of pain it
was creating.  She had seen only Mrs. Martin and the two girls. 
They had received her doubtingly, if not coolly; and nothing
beyond the merest commonplace had been talked almost all the time--
till just at last, when Mrs. Martin's saying, all of a sudden,
that she thought Miss Smith was grown, had brought on a more
interesting subject, and a warmer manner.  In that very room
she had been measured last September, with her two friends. 
There were the pencilled marks and memorandums on the wainscot by
the window.  He had done it.  They all seemed to remember the day,
the hour, the party, the occasion--to feel the same consciousness,
the same regrets--to be ready to return to the same good understanding;
and they were just growing again like themselves, (Harriet, as Emma
must suspect, as ready as the best of them to be cordial and happy,)
when the carriage reappeared, and all was over.  The style of
the visit, and the shortness of it, were then felt to be decisive. 
Fourteen minutes to be given to those with whom she had thankfully
passed six weeks not six months ago!--Emma could not but picture
it all, and feel how justly they might resent, how naturally
Harriet must suffer.  It was a bad business.  She would have given
a great deal, or endured a great deal, to have had the Martins
in a higher rank of life.  They were so deserving, that a little
higher should have been enough:  but as it was, how could she have
done otherwise?--Impossible!--She could not repent.  They must
be separated; but there was a great deal of pain in the process--
so much to herself at this time, that she soon felt the necessity
of a little consolation, and resolved on going home by way of Randalls
to procure it.  Her mind was quite sick of Mr. Elton and the Martins. 
The refreshment of Randalls was absolutely necessary.
It was a good scheme; but on driving to the door they heard
that neither "master nor mistress was at home;" they had both
been out some time; the man believed they were gone to Hartfield.
"This is too bad," cried Emma, as they turned away.  "And now we
shall just miss them; too provoking!--I do not know when I have been
so disappointed."  And she leaned back in the corner, to indulge
her murmurs, or to reason them away; probably a little of both--
such being the commonest process of a not ill-disposed mind. 
Presently the carriage stopt; she looked up; it was stopt
by Mr. and Mrs. Weston, who were standing to speak to her. 
There was instant pleasure in the sight of them, and still greater
pleasure was conveyed in sound--for Mr. Weston immediately accosted
"How d'ye do?--how d'ye do?--We have been sitting with your father--
glad to see him so well.  Frank comes to-morrow--I had a letter
this morning--we see him to-morrow by dinner-time to a certainty--
he is at Oxford to-day, and he comes for a whole fortnight; I knew it would
be so.  If he had come at Christmas he could not have staid three days;
I was always glad he did not come at Christmas; now we are going
to have just the right weather for him, fine, dry, settled weather. 
We shall enjoy him completely; every thing has turned out exactly
There was no resisting such news, no possibility of avoiding the
influence of such a happy face as Mr. Weston's, confirmed as it all
was by the words and the countenance of his wife, fewer and quieter,
but not less to the purpose.  To know that she thought his coming
certain was enough to make Emma consider it so, and sincerely did
she rejoice in their joy.  It was a most delightful reanimation
of exhausted spirits.  The worn-out past was sunk in the freshness
of what was coming; and in the rapidity of half a moment's thought,
she hoped Mr. Elton would now be talked of no more.
Mr. Weston gave her the history of the engagements at Enscombe,
which allowed his son to answer for having an entire fortnight at
his command, as well as the route and the method of his journey;
"I shall soon bring him over to Hartfield," said he, at the conclusion.
Emma could imagine she saw a touch of the arm at this speech,
"We had better move on, Mr. Weston," said she, "we are detaining
"Well, well, I am ready;"--and turning again to Emma, "but you must
not be expecting such a very fine young man; you have only had my
account you know; I dare say he is really nothing extraordinary:"--
though his own sparkling eyes at the moment were speaking a very
Emma could look perfectly unconscious and innocent, and answer
"Think of me to-morrow, my dear Emma, about four o'clock,"
was Mrs. Weston's parting injunction; spoken with some anxiety,
"Four o'clock!--depend upon it he will be here by three," was Mr. Weston's
quick amendment; and so ended a most satisfactory meeting. 
Emma's spirits were mounted quite up to happiness; every thing wore
a different air; James and his horses seemed not half so sluggish
as before.  When she looked at the hedges, she thought the elder at
least must soon be coming out; and when she turned round to Harriet,
she saw something like a look of spring, a tender smile even there.
"Will Mr. Frank Churchill pass through Bath as well as Oxford?"--
was a question, however, which did not augur much.
But neither geography nor tranquillity could come all at once,
and Emma was now in a humour to resolve that they should both come
The morning of the interesting day arrived, and Mrs. Weston's
faithful pupil did not forget either at ten, or eleven, or twelve
"My dear, dear anxious friend,"--said she, in mental soliloquy,
while walking downstairs from her own room, "always overcareful
for every body's comfort but your own; I see you now in all your
little fidgets, going again and again into his room, to be sure
that all is right."  The clock struck twelve as she passed through
the hall.  "'Tis twelve; I shall not forget to think of you four
hours hence; and by this time to-morrow, perhaps, or a little later,
I may be thinking of the possibility of their all calling here. 
She opened the parlour door, and saw two gentlemen sitting with
her father--Mr. Weston and his son.  They had been arrived only
a few minutes, and Mr. Weston had scarcely finished his explanation
of Frank's being a day before his time, and her father was yet
in the midst of his very civil welcome and congratulations, when
she appeared, to have her share of surprize, introduction, and pleasure.
The Frank Churchill so long talked of, so high in interest,
was actually before her--he was presented to her, and she did
not think too much had been said in his praise; he was a very good
looking young man; height, air, address, all were unexceptionable,
and his countenance had a great deal of the spirit and liveliness
of his father's; he looked quick and sensible.  She felt immediately
that she should like him; and there was a well-bred ease of manner,
and a readiness to talk, which convinced her that he came intending
to be acquainted with her, and that acquainted they soon must be.
He had reached Randalls the evening before.  She was pleased
with the eagerness to arrive which had made him alter his plan,
and travel earlier, later, and quicker, that he might gain half
"I told you yesterday," cried Mr. Weston with exultation, "I told
you all that he would be here before the time named.  I remembered
what I used to do myself.  One cannot creep upon a journey;
one cannot help getting on faster than one has planned; and the
pleasure of coming in upon one's friends before the look-out begins,
is worth a great deal more than any little exertion it needs."
"It is a great pleasure where one can indulge in it," said the young man,
"though there are not many houses that I should presume on so far;
The word home made his father look on him with fresh complacency. 
Emma was directly sure that he knew how to make himself agreeable;
the conviction was strengthened by what followed.  He was very much
pleased with Randalls, thought it a most admirably arranged house,
would hardly allow it even to be very small, admired the situation,
the walk to Highbury, Highbury itself, Hartfield still more,
and professed himself to have always felt the sort of interest
in the country which none but one's own country gives, and the
greatest curiosity to visit it.  That he should never have been
able to indulge so amiable a feeling before, passed suspiciously
through Emma's brain; but still, if it were a falsehood, it was a
pleasant one, and pleasantly handled.  His manner had no air of study
or exaggeration.  He did really look and speak as if in a state of no
Their subjects in general were such as belong to an opening acquaintance. 
On his side were the inquiries,--"Was she a horsewoman?--Pleasant rides?--
Pleasant walks?--Had they a large neighbourhood?--Highbury, perhaps,
afforded society enough?--There were several very pretty houses
in and about it.--Balls--had they balls?--Was it a musical society?"
But when satisfied on all these points, and their acquaintance
proportionably advanced, he contrived to find an opportunity,
while their two fathers were engaged with each other, of introducing
his mother-in-law, and speaking of her with so much handsome praise,
so much warm admiration, so much gratitude for the happiness she
secured to his father, and her very kind reception of himself,
as was an additional proof of his knowing how to please--
and of his certainly thinking it worth while to try to please her. 
He did not advance a word of praise beyond what she knew to be
thoroughly deserved by Mrs. Weston; but, undoubtedly he could know
very little of the matter.  He understood what would be welcome;
he could be sure of little else.  "His father's marriage," he said,
"had been the wisest measure, every friend must rejoice in it;
and the family from whom he had received such a blessing must
be ever considered as having conferred the highest obligation
He got as near as he could to thanking her for Miss Taylor's merits,
without seeming quite to forget that in the common course of things it
was to be rather supposed that Miss Taylor had formed Miss Woodhouse's
character, than Miss Woodhouse Miss Taylor's. And at last, as if resolved
to qualify his opinion completely for travelling round to its object, he
wound it all up with astonishment at the youth and beauty of her person.
"Elegant, agreeable manners, I was prepared for," said he;
"but I confess that, considering every thing, I had not expected
more than a very tolerably well-looking woman of a certain age;
I did not know that I was to find a pretty young woman in Mrs. Weston."
"You cannot see too much perfection in Mrs. Weston for my feelings,"
said Emma; "were you to guess her to be eighteen, I should listen
with pleasure; but she would be ready to quarrel with you for using
such words.  Don't let her imagine that you have spoken of her as
"I hope I should know better," he replied; "no, depend upon it,
(with a gallant bow,) that in addressing Mrs. Weston I should
understand whom I might praise without any danger of being thought
Emma wondered whether the same suspicion of what might be expected
from their knowing each other, which had taken strong possession
of her mind, had ever crossed his; and whether his compliments were
to be considered as marks of acquiescence, or proofs of defiance. 
She must see more of him to understand his ways; at present she
She had no doubt of what Mr. Weston was often thinking about. 
His quick eye she detected again and again glancing towards them
with a happy expression; and even, when he might have determined not
to look, she was confident that he was often listening.
Her own father's perfect exemption from any thought of the kind,
the entire deficiency in him of all such sort of penetration
or suspicion, was a most comfortable circumstance.  Happily he
was not farther from approving matrimony than from foreseeing it.--
Though always objecting to every marriage that was arranged,
he never suffered beforehand from the apprehension of any;
it seemed as if he could not think so ill of any two persons'
understanding as to suppose they meant to marry till it were
proved against them.  She blessed the favouring blindness. 
He could now, without the drawback of a single unpleasant surmise,
without a glance forward at any possible treachery in his guest,
give way to all his natural kind-hearted civility in solicitous
inquiries after Mr. Frank Churchill's accommodation on his journey,
through the sad evils of sleeping two nights on the road, and express
very genuine unmixed anxiety to know that he had certainly escaped
catching cold--which, however, he could not allow him to feel quite
A reasonable visit paid, Mr. Weston began to move.--"He must be going. 
He had business at the Crown about his hay, and a great many errands
for Mrs. Weston at Ford's, but he need not hurry any body else." 
His son, too well bred to hear the hint, rose immediately also,
"As you are going farther on business, sir, I will take the
opportunity of paying a visit, which must be paid some day or other,
and therefore may as well be paid now.  I have the honour of being
acquainted with a neighbour of yours, (turning to Emma,) a lady
residing in or near Highbury; a family of the name of Fairfax. 
I shall have no difficulty, I suppose, in finding the house;
though Fairfax, I believe, is not the proper name--I should rather
say Barnes, or Bates.  Do you know any family of that name?"
"To be sure we do," cried his father; "Mrs. Bates--we passed her house--
I saw Miss Bates at the window.  True, true, you are acquainted
with Miss Fairfax; I remember you knew her at Weymouth, and a fine
"There is no necessity for my calling this morning," said the
young man; "another day would do as well; but there was that degree
"Oh! go to-day, go to-day. Do not defer it.  What is right to be done
cannot be done too soon.  And, besides, I must give you a hint, Frank;
any want of attention to her here should be carefully avoided. 
You saw her with the Campbells, when she was the equal of every body
she mixed with, but here she is with a poor old grandmother,
who has barely enough to live on.  If you do not call early it
"I have heard her speak of the acquaintance," said Emma; "she is
He agreed to it, but with so quiet a "Yes," as inclined her almost
to doubt his real concurrence; and yet there must be a very distinct
sort of elegance for the fashionable world, if Jane Fairfax could
"If you were never particularly struck by her manners before,"
said she, "I think you will to-day. You will see her to advantage;
see her and hear her--no, I am afraid you will not hear her at all,
"You are acquainted with Miss Jane Fairfax, sir, are you?"
said Mr. Woodhouse, always the last to make his way in conversation;
"then give me leave to assure you that you will find her a very
agreeable young lady.  She is staying here on a visit to her grandmama
and aunt, very worthy people; I have known them all my life. 
They will be extremely glad to see you, I am sure; and one of my
"My dear sir, upon no account in the world; my father can direct me."
"But your father is not going so far; he is only going to the Crown,
quite on the other side of the street, and there are a great many houses;
you might be very much at a loss, and it is a very dirty walk,
unless you keep on the footpath; but my coachman can tell you
Mr. Frank Churchill still declined it, looking as serious as he could,
and his father gave his hearty support by calling out, "My good friend,
this is quite unnecessary; Frank knows a puddle of water when he
sees it, and as to Mrs. Bates's, he may get there from the Crown
They were permitted to go alone; and with a cordial nod from one,
and a graceful bow from the other, the two gentlemen took leave. 
Emma remained very well pleased with this beginning of the acquaintance,
and could now engage to think of them all at Randalls any hour of
The next morning brought Mr. Frank Churchill again.  He came with
Mrs. Weston, to whom and to Highbury he seemed to take very cordially. 
He had been sitting with her, it appeared, most companionably at home,
till her usual hour of exercise; and on being desired to chuse
their walk, immediately fixed on Highbury.--"He did not doubt there
being very pleasant walks in every direction, but if left to him,
he should always chuse the same.  Highbury, that airy, cheerful,
happy-looking Highbury, would be his constant attraction."--
Highbury, with Mrs. Weston, stood for Hartfield; and she trusted to
its bearing the same construction with him.  They walked thither directly.
Emma had hardly expected them:  for Mr. Weston, who had called in
for half a minute, in order to hear that his son was very handsome,
knew nothing of their plans; and it was an agreeable surprize
to her, therefore, to perceive them walking up to the house together,
arm in arm.  She was wanting to see him again, and especially
to see him in company with Mrs. Weston, upon his behaviour to whom
her opinion of him was to depend.  If he were deficient there,
nothing should make amends for it.  But on seeing them together,
she became perfectly satisfied.  It was not merely in fine words
or hyperbolical compliment that he paid his duty; nothing could be
more proper or pleasing than his whole manner to her--nothing could
more agreeably denote his wish of considering her as a friend and
securing her affection.  And there was time enough for Emma to form a
reasonable judgment, as their visit included all the rest of the morning. 
They were all three walking about together for an hour or two--
first round the shrubberies of Hartfield, and afterwards in Highbury. 
He was delighted with every thing; admired Hartfield sufficiently
for Mr. Woodhouse's ear; and when their going farther was resolved on,
confessed his wish to be made acquainted with the whole village,
and found matter of commendation and interest much oftener than Emma
Some of the objects of his curiosity spoke very amiable feelings. 
He begged to be shewn the house which his father had lived in so long,
and which had been the home of his father's father; and on recollecting
that an old woman who had nursed him was still living, walked in quest
of her cottage from one end of the street to the other; and though
in some points of pursuit or observation there was no positive merit,
they shewed, altogether, a good-will towards Highbury in general,
which must be very like a merit to those he was with.
Emma watched and decided, that with such feelings as were now shewn,
it could not be fairly supposed that he had been ever voluntarily
absenting himself; that he had not been acting a part, or making
a parade of insincere professions; and that Mr. Knightley certainly
Their first pause was at the Crown Inn, an inconsiderable house,
though the principal one of the sort, where a couple of pair of
post-horses were kept, more for the convenience of the neighbourhood
than from any run on the road; and his companions had not expected
to be detained by any interest excited there; but in passing it they
gave the history of the large room visibly added; it had been built
many years ago for a ball-room, and while the neighbourhood had been
in a particularly populous, dancing state, had been occasionally used
as such;--but such brilliant days had long passed away, and now the
highest purpose for which it was ever wanted was to accommodate a whist
club established among the gentlemen and half-gentlemen of the place. 
He was immediately interested.  Its character as a ball-room caught him;
and instead of passing on, he stopt for several minutes at the two
superior sashed windows which were open, to look in and contemplate
its capabilities, and lament that its original purpose should
have ceased.  He saw no fault in the room, he would acknowledge
none which they suggested.  No, it was long enough, broad enough,
handsome enough.  It would hold the very number for comfort. 
They ought to have balls there at least every fortnight through
the winter.  Why had not Miss Woodhouse revived the former good
old days of the room?--She who could do any thing in Highbury! 
The want of proper families in the place, and the conviction
that none beyond the place and its immediate environs could be
tempted to attend, were mentioned; but he was not satisfied. 
He could not be persuaded that so many good-looking houses as he saw
around him, could not furnish numbers enough for such a meeting;
and even when particulars were given and families described, he was
still unwilling to admit that the inconvenience of such a mixture
would be any thing, or that there would be the smallest difficulty
in every body's returning into their proper place the next morning. 
He argued like a young man very much bent on dancing; and Emma
was rather surprized to see the constitution of the Weston prevail
so decidedly against the habits of the Churchills.  He seemed to have
all the life and spirit, cheerful feelings, and social inclinations
of his father, and nothing of the pride or reserve of Enscombe. 
Of pride, indeed, there was, perhaps, scarcely enough; his indifference
to a confusion of rank, bordered too much on inelegance of mind. 
He could be no judge, however, of the evil he was holding cheap. 
At last he was persuaded to move on from the front of the Crown;
and being now almost facing the house where the Bateses lodged,
Emma recollected his intended visit the day before, and asked him
"Yes, oh! yes"--he replied; "I was just going to mention it. 
A very successful visit:--I saw all the three ladies; and felt very
much obliged to you for your preparatory hint.  If the talking aunt
had taken me quite by surprize, it must have been the death of me. 
As it was, I was only betrayed into paying a most unreasonable visit. 
Ten minutes would have been all that was necessary, perhaps all that
was proper; and I had told my father I should certainly be at home
before him--but there was no getting away, no pause; and, to my
utter astonishment, I found, when he (finding me nowhere else)
joined me there at last, that I had been actually sitting with them
very nearly three-quarters of an hour.  The good lady had not given me
"Ill, very ill--that is, if a young lady can ever be allowed to look ill. 
But the expression is hardly admissible, Mrs. Weston, is it? 
Ladies can never look ill.  And, seriously, Miss Fairfax is naturally
so pale, as almost always to give the appearance of ill health.--
Emma would not agree to this, and began a warm defence of Miss
Fairfax's complexion.  "It was certainly never brilliant, but she
would not allow it to have a sickly hue in general; and there was
a softness and delicacy in her skin which gave peculiar elegance
to the character of her face."  He listened with all due deference;
acknowledged that he had heard many people say the same--but yet he
must confess, that to him nothing could make amends for the want
of the fine glow of health.  Where features were indifferent,
a fine complexion gave beauty to them all; and where they were good,
the effect was--fortunately he need not attempt to describe what the
"Well," said Emma, "there is no disputing about taste.--At least
He shook his head and laughed.--"I cannot separate Miss Fairfax
"Did you see her often at Weymouth?  Were you often in the same society?"
At this moment they were approaching Ford's, and he hastily exclaimed,
"Ha! this must be the very shop that every body attends every day
of their lives, as my father informs me.  He comes to Highbury himself,
he says, six days out of the seven, and has always business at Ford's.
If it be not inconvenient to you, pray let us go in, that I may prove
myself to belong to the place, to be a true citizen of Highbury. 
I must buy something at Ford's. It will be taking out my freedom.--
"Oh! yes, gloves and every thing.  I do admire your patriotism. 
You will be adored in Highbury.  You were very popular before you came,
because you were Mr. Weston's son--but lay out half a guinea at
Ford's, and your popularity will stand upon your own virtues."
They went in; and while the sleek, well-tied parcels of "Men's Beavers"
and "York Tan" were bringing down and displaying on the counter,
he said--"But I beg your pardon, Miss Woodhouse, you were speaking
to me, you were saying something at the very moment of this burst
of my amor patriae.  Do not let me lose it.  I assure you the utmost
stretch of public fame would not make me amends for the loss of any
"I merely asked, whether you had known much of Miss Fairfax
"And now that I understand your question, I must pronounce it to be a
very unfair one.  It is always the lady's right to decide on the degree
of acquaintance.  Miss Fairfax must already have given her account.--
I shall not commit myself by claiming more than she may chuse to allow."
"Upon my word! you answer as discreetly as she could do herself. 
But her account of every thing leaves so much to be guessed,
she is so very reserved, so very unwilling to give the least
information about any body, that I really think you may say what you
"May I, indeed?--Then I will speak the truth, and nothing suits me
so well.  I met her frequently at Weymouth.  I had known the Campbells
a little in town; and at Weymouth we were very much in the same set. 
Colonel Campbell is a very agreeable man, and Mrs. Campbell a friendly,
"You know Miss Fairfax's situation in life, I conclude; what she
"You get upon delicate subjects, Emma," said Mrs. Weston smiling;
"remember that I am here.--Mr. Frank Churchill hardly knows
what to say when you speak of Miss Fairfax's situation in life. 
"I certainly do forget to think of her," said Emma, "as having ever
been any thing but my friend and my dearest friend."
He looked as if he fully understood and honoured such a sentiment.
When the gloves were bought, and they had quitted the shop again,
"Did you ever hear the young lady we were speaking of, play?"
"Ever hear her!" repeated Emma.  "You forget how much she belongs
to Highbury.  I have heard her every year of our lives since we
"You think so, do you?--I wanted the opinion of some one who
could really judge.  She appeared to me to play well, that is,
with considerable taste, but I know nothing of the matter myself.--
I am excessively fond of music, but without the smallest skill
or right of judging of any body's performance.--I have been used
to hear her's admired; and I remember one proof of her being
thought to play well:--a man, a very musical man, and in love
with another woman--engaged to her--on the point of marriage--
would yet never ask that other woman to sit down to the instrument,
if the lady in question could sit down instead--never seemed
to like to hear one if he could hear the other.  That, I thought,
in a man of known musical talent, was some proof."
"Proof indeed!" said Emma, highly amused.--"Mr. Dixon is very musical,
is he?  We shall know more about them all, in half an hour, from you,
than Miss Fairfax would have vouchsafed in half a year."
"Yes, Mr. Dixon and Miss Campbell were the persons; and I thought
"Certainly--very strong it was; to own the truth, a great deal
stronger than, if I had been Miss Campbell, would have been at all
agreeable to me.  I could not excuse a man's having more music
than love--more ear than eye--a more acute sensibility to fine
sounds than to my feelings.  How did Miss Campbell appear to like it?"
"Poor comfort!" said Emma, laughing.  "One would rather have a stranger
preferred than one's very particular friend--with a stranger it might
not recur again--but the misery of having a very particular friend
always at hand, to do every thing better than one does oneself!--
Poor Mrs. Dixon!  Well, I am glad she is gone to settle in Ireland."
"You are right.  It was not very flattering to Miss Campbell;
"So much the better--or so much the worse:--I do not know which. 
But be it sweetness or be it stupidity in her--quickness of friendship,
or dulness of feeling--there was one person, I think, who must have
felt it:  Miss Fairfax herself.  She must have felt the improper
"Oh! do not imagine that I expect an account of Miss Fairfax's
sensations from you, or from any body else.  They are known to no
human being, I guess, but herself.  But if she continued to play
whenever she was asked by Mr. Dixon, one may guess what one chuses."
"There appeared such a perfectly good understanding among them all--"
he began rather quickly, but checking himself, added, "however, it
is impossible for me to say on what terms they really were--
how it might all be behind the scenes.  I can only say that there
was smoothness outwardly.  But you, who have known Miss Fairfax from
a child, must be a better judge of her character, and of how she
is likely to conduct herself in critical situations, than I can be."
"I have known her from a child, undoubtedly; we have been children
and women together; and it is natural to suppose that we should
be intimate,--that we should have taken to each other whenever
she visited her friends.  But we never did.  I hardly know how it
has happened; a little, perhaps, from that wickedness on my side
which was prone to take disgust towards a girl so idolized
and so cried up as she always was, by her aunt and grandmother,
and all their set.  And then, her reserve--I never could attach
"It is a most repulsive quality, indeed," said he.  "Oftentimes
very convenient, no doubt, but never pleasing.  There is safety
in reserve, but no attraction.  One cannot love a reserved person."
"Not till the reserve ceases towards oneself; and then the attraction
may be the greater.  But I must be more in want of a friend,
or an agreeable companion, than I have yet been, to take
the trouble of conquering any body's reserve to procure one. 
Intimacy between Miss Fairfax and me is quite out of the question. 
I have no reason to think ill of her--not the least--except that
such extreme and perpetual cautiousness of word and manner,
such a dread of giving a distinct idea about any body, is apt
to suggest suspicions of there being something to conceal."
He perfectly agreed with her:  and after walking together so long,
and thinking so much alike, Emma felt herself so well acquainted with him,
that she could hardly believe it to be only their second meeting. 
He was not exactly what she had expected; less of the man of the
world in some of his notions, less of the spoiled child of fortune,
therefore better than she had expected.  His ideas seemed more moderate--
his feelings warmer.  She was particularly struck by his manner
of considering Mr. Elton's house, which, as well as the church,
he would go and look at, and would not join them in finding much
fault with.  No, he could not believe it a bad house; not such a house
as a man was to be pitied for having.  If it were to be shared with
the woman he loved, he could not think any man to be pitied for having
that house.  There must be ample room in it for every real comfort. 
Mrs. Weston laughed, and said he did not know what he was talking about. 
Used only to a large house himself, and without ever thinking how many
advantages and accommodations were attached to its size, he could
be no judge of the privations inevitably belonging to a small one. 
But Emma, in her own mind, determined that he did know what he
was talking about, and that he shewed a very amiable inclination
to settle early in life, and to marry, from worthy motives. 
He might not be aware of the inroads on domestic peace to be
occasioned by no housekeeper's room, or a bad butler's pantry,
but no doubt he did perfectly feel that Enscombe could not make
him happy, and that whenever he were attached, he would willingly
give up much of wealth to be allowed an early establishment.
Emma's very good opinion of Frank Churchill was a little shaken
the following day, by hearing that he was gone off to London,
merely to have his hair cut.  A sudden freak seemed to have seized him
at breakfast, and he had sent for a chaise and set off, intending to
return to dinner, but with no more important view that appeared than
having his hair cut.  There was certainly no harm in his travelling
sixteen miles twice over on such an errand; but there was an air
of foppery and nonsense in it which she could not approve.  It did
not accord with the rationality of plan, the moderation in expense,
or even the unselfish warmth of heart, which she had believed herself
to discern in him yesterday.  Vanity, extravagance, love of change,
restlessness of temper, which must be doing something, good or bad;
heedlessness as to the pleasure of his father and Mrs. Weston,
indifferent as to how his conduct might appear in general; he became
liable to all these charges.  His father only called him a coxcomb,
and thought it a very good story; but that Mrs. Weston did not like it,
was clear enough, by her passing it over as quickly as possible,
and making no other comment than that "all young people would have
With the exception of this little blot, Emma found that his visit
hitherto had given her friend only good ideas of him.  Mrs. Weston
was very ready to say how attentive and pleasant a companion he
made himself--how much she saw to like in his disposition altogether. 
He appeared to have a very open temper--certainly a very cheerful
and lively one; she could observe nothing wrong in his notions,
a great deal decidedly right; he spoke of his uncle with warm regard,
was fond of talking of him--said he would be the best man in the
world if he were left to himself; and though there was no being
attached to the aunt, he acknowledged her kindness with gratitude,
and seemed to mean always to speak of her with respect. 
This was all very promising; and, but for such an unfortunate fancy
for having his hair cut, there was nothing to denote him unworthy
of the distinguished honour which her imagination had given him;
the honour, if not of being really in love with her, of being
at least very near it, and saved only by her own indifference--
(for still her resolution held of never marrying)--the honour, in short,
of being marked out for her by all their joint acquaintance.
Mr. Weston, on his side, added a virtue to the account which must
have some weight.  He gave her to understand that Frank admired
her extremely--thought her very beautiful and very charming;
and with so much to be said for him altogether, she found she must
not judge him harshly.  As Mrs. Weston observed, "all young people
There was one person among his new acquaintance in Surry, not so
leniently disposed.  In general he was judged, throughout the parishes
of Donwell and Highbury, with great candour; liberal allowances
were made for the little excesses of such a handsome young man--
one who smiled so often and bowed so well; but there was one spirit
among them not to be softened, from its power of censure, by bows
or smiles--Mr. Knightley.  The circumstance was told him at Hartfield;
for the moment, he was silent; but Emma heard him almost immediately
afterwards say to himself, over a newspaper he held in his hand,
"Hum! just the trifling, silly fellow I took him for."  She had
half a mind to resent; but an instant's observation convinced
her that it was really said only to relieve his own feelings,
and not meant to provoke; and therefore she let it pass.
Although in one instance the bearers of not good tidings,
Mr. and Mrs. Weston's visit this morning was in another respect
particularly opportune.  Something occurred while they were
at Hartfield, to make Emma want their advice; and, which was
still more lucky, she wanted exactly the advice they gave.
This was the occurrence:--The Coles had been settled some years
in Highbury, and were very good sort of people--friendly, liberal,
and unpretending; but, on the other hand, they were of low origin,
in trade, and only moderately genteel.  On their first coming into
the country, they had lived in proportion to their income, quietly,
keeping little company, and that little unexpensively; but the last
year or two had brought them a considerable increase of means--
the house in town had yielded greater profits, and fortune in general
had smiled on them.  With their wealth, their views increased;
their want of a larger house, their inclination for more company. 
They added to their house, to their number of servants,
to their expenses of every sort; and by this time were, in fortune
and style of living, second only to the family at Hartfield. 
Their love of society, and their new dining-room, prepared every body
for their keeping dinner-company; and a few parties, chiefly among
the single men, had already taken place.  The regular and best
families Emma could hardly suppose they would presume to invite--
neither Donwell, nor Hartfield, nor Randalls.  Nothing should
tempt her to go, if they did; and she regretted that her father's
known habits would be giving her refusal less meaning than she
could wish.  The Coles were very respectable in their way, but they
ought to be taught that it was not for them to arrange the terms
on which the superior families would visit them.  This lesson,
she very much feared, they would receive only from herself;
she had little hope of Mr. Knightley, none of Mr. Weston.
But she had made up her mind how to meet this presumption so many
weeks before it appeared, that when the insult came at last,
it found her very differently affected.  Donwell and Randalls
had received their invitation, and none had come for her father
and herself; and Mrs. Weston's accounting for it with "I suppose
they will not take the liberty with you; they know you do not
dine out," was not quite sufficient.  She felt that she should
like to have had the power of refusal; and afterwards, as the idea
of the party to be assembled there, consisting precisely of those
whose society was dearest to her, occurred again and again,
she did not know that she might not have been tempted to accept. 
Harriet was to be there in the evening, and the Bateses.  They had
been speaking of it as they walked about Highbury the day before,
and Frank Churchill had most earnestly lamented her absence. 
Might not the evening end in a dance? had been a question of his. 
The bare possibility of it acted as a farther irritation on her spirits;
and her being left in solitary grandeur, even supposing the omission
to be intended as a compliment, was but poor comfort.
It was the arrival of this very invitation while the Westons were
at Hartfield, which made their presence so acceptable; for though her
first remark, on reading it, was that "of course it must be declined,"
she so very soon proceeded to ask them what they advised her to do,
that their advice for her going was most prompt and successful.
She owned that, considering every thing, she was not absolutely
without inclination for the party.  The Coles expressed themselves
so properly--there was so much real attention in the manner of it--
so much consideration for her father.  "They would have solicited the
honour earlier, but had been waiting the arrival of a folding-screen
from London, which they hoped might keep Mr. Woodhouse from any draught
of air, and therefore induce him the more readily to give them the
honour of his company.  "Upon the whole, she was very persuadable;
and it being briefly settled among themselves how it might be
done without neglecting his comfort--how certainly Mrs. Goddard,
if not Mrs. Bates, might be depended on for bearing him company--
Mr. Woodhouse was to be talked into an acquiescence of his daughter's
going out to dinner on a day now near at hand, and spending
the whole evening away from him.  As for his going, Emma did
not wish him to think it possible, the hours would be too late,
and the party too numerous.  He was soon pretty well resigned.
"I am not fond of dinner-visiting," said he--"I never was. 
No more is Emma.  Late hours do not agree with us.  I am sorry
Mr. and Mrs. Cole should have done it.  I think it would be
much better if they would come in one afternoon next summer,
and take their tea with us--take us in their afternoon walk;
which they might do, as our hours are so reasonable, and yet get home
without being out in the damp of the evening.  The dews of a summer
evening are what I would not expose any body to.  However, as they
are so very desirous to have dear Emma dine with them, and as you
will both be there, and Mr. Knightley too, to take care of her,
I cannot wish to prevent it, provided the weather be what it ought,
neither damp, nor cold, nor windy."  Then turning to Mrs. Weston,
with a look of gentle reproach--"Ah!  Miss Taylor, if you had
not married, you would have staid at home with me."
"Well, sir," cried Mr. Weston, "as I took Miss Taylor away,
it is incumbent on me to supply her place, if I can; and I will
step to Mrs. Goddard in a moment, if you wish it."
But the idea of any thing to be done in a moment, was increasing,
not lessening, Mr. Woodhouse's agitation.  The ladies knew better
how to allay it.  Mr. Weston must be quiet, and every thing
With this treatment, Mr. Woodhouse was soon composed enough
for talking as usual.  "He should be happy to see Mrs. Goddard. 
He had a great regard for Mrs. Goddard; and Emma should write a line,
and invite her.  James could take the note.  But first of all,
"You will make my excuses, my dear, as civilly as possible.  You will
say that I am quite an invalid, and go no where, and therefore must
decline their obliging invitation; beginning with my compliments,
of course.  But you will do every thing right.  I need not tell you
what is to be done.  We must remember to let James know that the carriage
will be wanted on Tuesday.  I shall have no fears for you with him. 
We have never been there above once since the new approach was made;
but still I have no doubt that James will take you very safely. 
And when you get there, you must tell him at what time you would
have him come for you again; and you had better name an early hour. 
You will not like staying late.  You will get very tired when tea
"But you would not wish me to come away before I am tired, papa?"
"Oh! no, my love; but you will soon be tired.  There will be
a great many people talking at once.  You will not like the noise."
"But, my dear sir," cried Mr. Weston, "if Emma comes away early,
"And no great harm if it does," said Mr. Woodhouse.  "The sooner
"But you do not consider how it may appear to the Coles. 
Emma's going away directly after tea might be giving offence. 
They are good-natured people, and think little of their own claims;
but still they must feel that any body's hurrying away is no
great compliment; and Miss Woodhouse's doing it would be more thought
of than any other person's in the room.  You would not wish to disappoint
and mortify the Coles, I am sure, sir; friendly, good sort of people
as ever lived, and who have been your neighbours these ten years."
"No, upon no account in the world, Mr. Weston; I am much obliged
to you for reminding me.  I should be extremely sorry to be giving
them any pain.  I know what worthy people they are.  Perry tells
me that Mr. Cole never touches malt liquor.  You would not think
it to look at him, but he is bilious--Mr. Cole is very bilious. 
No, I would not be the means of giving them any pain.  My dear Emma,
we must consider this.  I am sure, rather than run the risk of hurting
Mr. and Mrs. Cole, you would stay a little longer than you might wish. 
You will not regard being tired.  You will be perfectly safe,
"Oh yes, papa.  I have no fears at all for myself; and I should have
no scruples of staying as late as Mrs. Weston, but on your account. 
I am only afraid of your sitting up for me.  I am not afraid
of your not being exceedingly comfortable with Mrs. Goddard. 
She loves piquet, you know; but when she is gone home, I am afraid
you will be sitting up by yourself, instead of going to bed at your
usual time--and the idea of that would entirely destroy my comfort. 
He did, on the condition of some promises on her side:  such as that,
if she came home cold, she would be sure to warm herself thoroughly;
if hungry, that she would take something to eat; that her own maid
should sit up for her; and that Serle and the butler should see
that every thing were safe in the house, as usual.
Frank Churchill came back again; and if he kept his father's
dinner waiting, it was not known at Hartfield; for Mrs. Weston
was too anxious for his being a favourite with Mr. Woodhouse,
to betray any imperfection which could be concealed.
He came back, had had his hair cut, and laughed at himself with
a very good grace, but without seeming really at all ashamed
of what he had done.  He had no reason to wish his hair longer,
to conceal any confusion of face; no reason to wish the money unspent,
to improve his spirits.  He was quite as undaunted and as lively
as ever; and, after seeing him, Emma thus moralised to herself:--
"I do not know whether it ought to be so, but certainly silly things
do cease to be silly if they are done by sensible people in an
impudent way.  Wickedness is always wickedness, but folly is not
always folly.--It depends upon the character of those who handle it. 
Mr. Knightley, he is not a trifling, silly young man.  If he were,
he would have done this differently.  He would either have gloried
in the achievement, or been ashamed of it.  There would have been
either the ostentation of a coxcomb, or the evasions of a mind too
weak to defend its own vanities.--No, I am perfectly sure that he
With Tuesday came the agreeable prospect of seeing him again,
and for a longer time than hitherto; of judging of his general manners,
and by inference, of the meaning of his manners towards herself;
of guessing how soon it might be necessary for her to throw coldness
into her air; and of fancying what the observations of all those
might be, who were now seeing them together for the first time.
She meant to be very happy, in spite of the scene being laid at
Mr. Cole's; and without being able to forget that among the failings
of Mr. Elton, even in the days of his favour, none had disturbed
her more than his propensity to dine with Mr. Cole.
Her father's comfort was amply secured, Mrs. Bates as well as
Mrs. Goddard being able to come; and her last pleasing duty,
before she left the house, was to pay her respects to them as
they sat together after dinner; and while her father was fondly
noticing the beauty of her dress, to make the two ladies all
the amends in her power, by helping them to large slices of cake
and full glasses of wine, for whatever unwilling self-denial his
care of their constitution might have obliged them to practise
during the meal.--She had provided a plentiful dinner for them;
she wished she could know that they had been allowed to eat it.
She followed another carriage to Mr. Cole's door; and was pleased
to see that it was Mr. Knightley's; for Mr. Knightley keeping
no horses, having little spare money and a great deal of health,
activity, and independence, was too apt, in Emma's opinion, to get
about as he could, and not use his carriage so often as became
the owner of Donwell Abbey.  She had an opportunity now of speaking
her approbation while warm from her heart, for he stopped to hand her out.
"This is coming as you should do," said she; "like a gentleman.--
He thanked her, observing, "How lucky that we should arrive at the same
moment! for, if we had met first in the drawing-room, I doubt whether
you would have discerned me to be more of a gentleman than usual.--
You might not have distinguished how I came, by my look or manner."
"Yes I should, I am sure I should.  There is always a look of
consciousness or bustle when people come in a way which they know
to be beneath them.  You think you carry it off very well, I dare say,
but with you it is a sort of bravado, an air of affected unconcern;
I always observe it whenever I meet you under those circumstances. 
Now you have nothing to try for.  You are not afraid of being
supposed ashamed.  You are not striving to look taller than any
body else.  Now I shall really be very happy to walk into the same
"Nonsensical girl!" was his reply, but not at all in anger.
Emma had as much reason to be satisfied with the rest of the party
as with Mr. Knightley.  She was received with a cordial respect
which could not but please, and given all the consequence she could
wish for.  When the Westons arrived, the kindest looks of love,
the strongest of admiration were for her, from both husband and wife;
the son approached her with a cheerful eagerness which marked
her as his peculiar object, and at dinner she found him seated
by her--and, as she firmly believed, not without some dexterity
The party was rather large, as it included one other family, a proper
unobjectionable country family, whom the Coles had the advantage of
naming among their acquaintance, and the male part of Mr. Cox's family,
the lawyer of Highbury.  The less worthy females were to come
in the evening, with Miss Bates, Miss Fairfax, and Miss Smith;
but already, at dinner, they were too numerous for any subject
of conversation to be general; and, while politics and Mr. Elton
were talked over, Emma could fairly surrender all her attention to
the pleasantness of her neighbour.  The first remote sound to which
she felt herself obliged to attend, was the name of Jane Fairfax. 
Mrs. Cole seemed to be relating something of her that was expected to be
very interesting.  She listened, and found it well worth listening to. 
That very dear part of Emma, her fancy, received an amusing supply. 
Mrs. Cole was telling that she had been calling on Miss Bates,
and as soon as she entered the room had been struck by the sight
of a pianoforte--a very elegant looking instrument--not a grand,
but a large-sized square pianoforte; and the substance of the story,
the end of all the dialogue which ensued of surprize, and inquiry,
and congratulations on her side, and explanations on Miss Bates's, was,
that this pianoforte had arrived from Broadwood's the day before,
to the great astonishment of both aunt and niece--entirely unexpected;
that at first, by Miss Bates's account, Jane herself was quite at
a loss, quite bewildered to think who could possibly have ordered it--
but now, they were both perfectly satisfied that it could be from only
one quarter;--of course it must be from Colonel Campbell.
"One can suppose nothing else," added Mrs. Cole, "and I was only
surprized that there could ever have been a doubt.  But Jane,
it seems, had a letter from them very lately, and not a word was said
about it.  She knows their ways best; but I should not consider their
silence as any reason for their not meaning to make the present. 
Mrs. Cole had many to agree with her; every body who spoke on the
subject was equally convinced that it must come from Colonel Campbell,
and equally rejoiced that such a present had been made; and there
were enough ready to speak to allow Emma to think her own way,
"I declare, I do not know when I have heard any thing that has given
me more satisfaction!--It always has quite hurt me that Jane Fairfax,
who plays so delightfully, should not have an instrument. 
It seemed quite a shame, especially considering how many houses
there are where fine instruments are absolutely thrown away. 
This is like giving ourselves a slap, to be sure! and it was
but yesterday I was telling Mr. Cole, I really was ashamed
to look at our new grand pianoforte in the drawing-room, while I
do not know one note from another, and our little girls, who are
but just beginning, perhaps may never make any thing of it;
and there is poor Jane Fairfax, who is mistress of music, has not
any thing of the nature of an instrument, not even the pitifullest
old spinet in the world, to amuse herself with.--I was saying this
to Mr. Cole but yesterday, and he quite agreed with me; only he
is so particularly fond of music that he could not help indulging
himself in the purchase, hoping that some of our good neighbours might
be so obliging occasionally to put it to a better use than we can;
and that really is the reason why the instrument was bought--
or else I am sure we ought to be ashamed of it.--We are in great
hopes that Miss Woodhouse may be prevailed with to try it this evening."
Miss Woodhouse made the proper acquiescence; and finding that nothing
more was to be entrapped from any communication of Mrs. Cole's,
"Me!--I suppose I smile for pleasure at Colonel Campbell's being
so rich and so liberal.--It is a handsome present."
"Perhaps Miss Fairfax has never been staying here so long before."
"Or that he did not give her the use of their own instrument--
which must now be shut up in London, untouched by any body."
"That is a grand pianoforte, and he might think it too large
"You may say what you chuse--but your countenance testifies
that your thoughts on this subject are very much like mine."
"I do not know.  I rather believe you are giving me more credit for
acuteness than I deserve.  I smile because you smile, and shall probably
suspect whatever I find you suspect; but at present I do not see what
there is to question.  If Colonel Campbell is not the person, who can be?"
"Mrs. Dixon! very true indeed.  I had not thought of Mrs. Dixon. 
She must know as well as her father, how acceptable an instrument
would be; and perhaps the mode of it, the mystery, the surprize,
is more like a young woman's scheme than an elderly man's. It
is Mrs. Dixon, I dare say.  I told you that your suspicions would
"If so, you must extend your suspicions and comprehend Mr. Dixon
"Mr. Dixon.--Very well.  Yes, I immediately perceive that it must
be the joint present of Mr. and Mrs. Dixon.  We were speaking the
other day, you know, of his being so warm an admirer of her performance."
"Yes, and what you told me on that head, confirmed an idea which I
had entertained before.--I do not mean to reflect upon the good
intentions of either Mr. Dixon or Miss Fairfax, but I cannot help
suspecting either that, after making his proposals to her friend,
he had the misfortune to fall in love with her, or that he became
conscious of a little attachment on her side.  One might guess
twenty things without guessing exactly the right; but I am sure
there must be a particular cause for her chusing to come to Highbury
instead of going with the Campbells to Ireland.  Here, she must be
leading a life of privation and penance; there it would have been
all enjoyment.  As to the pretence of trying her native air, I look
upon that as a mere excuse.--In the summer it might have passed;
but what can any body's native air do for them in the months
of January, February, and March?  Good fires and carriages would
be much more to the purpose in most cases of delicate health, and I
dare say in her's. I do not require you to adopt all my suspicions,
though you make so noble a profession of doing it, but I honestly
"And, upon my word, they have an air of great probability. 
Mr. Dixon's preference of her music to her friend's, I can answer
"And then, he saved her life.  Did you ever hear of that?--
A water party; and by some accident she was falling overboard. 
"Were you really?--Well!--But you observed nothing of course,
for it seems to be a new idea to you.--If I had been there, I think
"I dare say you would; but I, simple I, saw nothing but the fact,
that Miss Fairfax was nearly dashed from the vessel and that Mr. Dixon
caught her.--It was the work of a moment.  And though the consequent
shock and alarm was very great and much more durable--indeed I
believe it was half an hour before any of us were comfortable again--
yet that was too general a sensation for any thing of peculiar
anxiety to be observable.  I do not mean to say, however, that you
The conversation was here interrupted.  They were called on to share
in the awkwardness of a rather long interval between the courses,
and obliged to be as formal and as orderly as the others; but when
the table was again safely covered, when every corner dish was placed
exactly right, and occupation and ease were generally restored,
"The arrival of this pianoforte is decisive with me.  I wanted to know
a little more, and this tells me quite enough.  Depend upon it,
we shall soon hear that it is a present from Mr. and Mrs. Dixon."
"And if the Dixons should absolutely deny all knowledge of it we
"No, I am sure it is not from the Campbells.  Miss Fairfax knows it
is not from the Campbells, or they would have been guessed at first. 
She would not have been puzzled, had she dared fix on them. 
I may not have convinced you perhaps, but I am perfectly convinced
myself that Mr. Dixon is a principal in the business."
"Indeed you injure me if you suppose me unconvinced.  Your reasonings
carry my judgment along with them entirely.  At first, while I
supposed you satisfied that Colonel Campbell was the giver, I saw
it only as paternal kindness, and thought it the most natural thing
in the world.  But when you mentioned Mrs. Dixon, I felt how much more
probable that it should be the tribute of warm female friendship. 
And now I can see it in no other light than as an offering of love."
There was no occasion to press the matter farther.  The conviction
seemed real; he looked as if he felt it.  She said no more,
other subjects took their turn; and the rest of the dinner passed away;
the dessert succeeded, the children came in, and were talked
to and admired amid the usual rate of conversation; a few clever
things said, a few downright silly, but by much the larger proportion
neither the one nor the other--nothing worse than everyday remarks,
The ladies had not been long in the drawing-room, before the other ladies,
in their different divisions, arrived.  Emma watched the entree of her
own particular little friend; and if she could not exult in her dignity
and grace, she could not only love the blooming sweetness and the
artless manner, but could most heartily rejoice in that light, cheerful,
unsentimental disposition which allowed her so many alleviations
of pleasure, in the midst of the pangs of disappointed affection. 
There she sat--and who would have guessed how many tears she had
been lately shedding?  To be in company, nicely dressed herself
and seeing others nicely dressed, to sit and smile and look pretty,
and say nothing, was enough for the happiness of the present hour. 
Jane Fairfax did look and move superior; but Emma suspected she
might have been glad to change feelings with Harriet, very glad
to have purchased the mortification of having loved--yes, of having
loved even Mr. Elton in vain--by the surrender of all the dangerous
pleasure of knowing herself beloved by the husband of her friend.
In so large a party it was not necessary that Emma should approach her. 
She did not wish to speak of the pianoforte, she felt too much
in the secret herself, to think the appearance of curiosity
or interest fair, and therefore purposely kept at a distance;
but by the others, the subject was almost immediately introduced,
and she saw the blush of consciousness with which congratulations
were received, the blush of guilt which accompanied the name of "my
Mrs. Weston, kind-hearted and musical, was particularly interested
by the circumstance, and Emma could not help being amused at her
perseverance in dwelling on the subject; and having so much to ask
and to say as to tone, touch, and pedal, totally unsuspicious
of that wish of saying as little about it as possible, which she
They were soon joined by some of the gentlemen; and the very first of the
early was Frank Churchill.  In he walked, the first and the handsomest;
and after paying his compliments en passant to Miss Bates and
her niece, made his way directly to the opposite side of the circle,
where sat Miss Woodhouse; and till he could find a seat by her,
would not sit at all.  Emma divined what every body present must
be thinking.  She was his object, and every body must perceive it. 
She introduced him to her friend, Miss Smith, and, at convenient
moments afterwards, heard what each thought of the other.  "He had
never seen so lovely a face, and was delighted with her naivete." 
And she, "Only to be sure it was paying him too great a compliment,
but she did think there were some looks a little like Mr. Elton." 
Emma restrained her indignation, and only turned from her in silence.
Smiles of intelligence passed between her and the gentleman on first
glancing towards Miss Fairfax; but it was most prudent to avoid speech. 
He told her that he had been impatient to leave the dining-room--
hated sitting long--was always the first to move when he could--
that his father, Mr. Knightley, Mr. Cox, and Mr. Cole, were left
very busy over parish business--that as long as he had staid,
however, it had been pleasant enough, as he had found them in general
a set of gentlemanlike, sensible men; and spoke so handsomely of
Highbury altogether--thought it so abundant in agreeable families--
that Emma began to feel she had been used to despise the place
rather too much.  She questioned him as to the society in Yorkshire--
the extent of the neighbourhood about Enscombe, and the sort;
and could make out from his answers that, as far as Enscombe
was concerned, there was very little going on, that their visitings
were among a range of great families, none very near; and that even
when days were fixed, and invitations accepted, it was an even
chance that Mrs. Churchill were not in health and spirits for going;
that they made a point of visiting no fresh person; and that,
though he had his separate engagements, it was not without difficulty,
without considerable address at times, that he could get away,
She saw that Enscombe could not satisfy, and that Highbury,
taken at its best, might reasonably please a young man who had more
retirement at home than he liked.  His importance at Enscombe was
very evident.  He did not boast, but it naturally betrayed itself,
that he had persuaded his aunt where his uncle could do nothing,
and on her laughing and noticing it, he owned that he believed (excepting
one or two points) he could with time persuade her to any thing. 
One of those points on which his influence failed, he then mentioned. 
He had wanted very much to go abroad--had been very eager indeed
to be allowed to travel--but she would not hear of it.  This had
happened the year before.  Now, he said, he was beginning to have
The unpersuadable point, which he did not mention, Emma guessed
"I have made a most wretched discovery," said he, after a short pause.--
"I have been here a week to-morrow--half my time.  I never knew
days fly so fast.  A week to-morrow!--And I have hardly begun to
enjoy myself.  But just got acquainted with Mrs. Weston, and others!--
"Perhaps you may now begin to regret that you spent one whole day,
"No," said he, smiling, "that is no subject of regret at all. 
I have no pleasure in seeing my friends, unless I can believe myself
The rest of the gentlemen being now in the room, Emma found herself
obliged to turn from him for a few minutes, and listen to Mr. Cole. 
When Mr. Cole had moved away, and her attention could be restored
as before, she saw Frank Churchill looking intently across the room
at Miss Fairfax, who was sitting exactly opposite.
He started.  "Thank you for rousing me," he replied.  "I believe
I have been very rude; but really Miss Fairfax has done her hair
in so odd a way--so very odd a way--that I cannot keep my eyes
from her.  I never saw any thing so outree!--Those curls!--This must
be a fancy of her own.  I see nobody else looking like her!--
I must go and ask her whether it is an Irish fashion.  Shall I?--
Yes, I will--I declare I will--and you shall see how she takes it;--
He was gone immediately; and Emma soon saw him standing before Miss
Fairfax, and talking to her; but as to its effect on the young lady,
as he had improvidently placed himself exactly between them, exactly
in front of Miss Fairfax, she could absolutely distinguish nothing.
Before he could return to his chair, it was taken by Mrs. Weston.
"This is the luxury of a large party," said she:--"one can get
near every body, and say every thing.  My dear Emma, I am longing
to talk to you.  I have been making discoveries and forming plans,
just like yourself, and I must tell them while the idea is fresh. 
Do you know how Miss Bates and her niece came here?"
"Oh! yes--but how they were conveyed hither?--the manner of their coming?"
"They walked, I conclude.  How else could they come?"
"Very true.--Well, a little while ago it occurred to me how very sad
it would be to have Jane Fairfax walking home again, late at night,
and cold as the nights are now.  And as I looked at her, though I
never saw her appear to more advantage, it struck me that she
was heated, and would therefore be particularly liable to take cold. 
Poor girl!  I could not bear the idea of it; so, as soon as Mr. Weston
came into the room, and I could get at him, I spoke to him about
the carriage.  You may guess how readily he came into my wishes;
and having his approbation, I made my way directly to Miss Bates,
to assure her that the carriage would be at her service before it took
us home; for I thought it would be making her comfortable at once. 
Good soul! she was as grateful as possible, you may be sure. 
`Nobody was ever so fortunate as herself!'--but with many,
many thanks--`there was no occasion to trouble us, for Mr. Knightley's
carriage had brought, and was to take them home again.'  I was
quite surprized;--very glad, I am sure; but really quite surprized. 
Such a very kind attention--and so thoughtful an attention!--
the sort of thing that so few men would think of.  And, in short,
from knowing his usual ways, I am very much inclined to think
that it was for their accommodation the carriage was used at all. 
I do suspect he would not have had a pair of horses for himself,
and that it was only as an excuse for assisting them."
"Very likely," said Emma--"nothing more likely.  I know no man
more likely than Mr. Knightley to do the sort of thing--to do any
thing really good-natured, useful, considerate, or benevolent. 
He is not a gallant man, but he is a very humane one; and this,
considering Jane Fairfax's ill-health, would appear a case
of humanity to him;--and for an act of unostentatious kindness,
there is nobody whom I would fix on more than on Mr. Knightley. 
I know he had horses to-day--for we arrived together; and I laughed at
him about it, but he said not a word that could betray."
"Well," said Mrs. Weston, smiling, "you give him credit for
more simple, disinterested benevolence in this instance than I do;
for while Miss Bates was speaking, a suspicion darted into my head,
and I have never been able to get it out again.  The more I think
of it, the more probable it appears.  In short, I have made a match
between Mr. Knightley and Jane Fairfax.  See the consequence
"Mr. Knightley and Jane Fairfax!" exclaimed Emma.  "Dear Mrs. Weston,
how could you think of such a thing?--Mr. Knightley!--Mr. Knightley
must not marry!--You would not have little Henry cut out from Donwell?--
Oh! no, no, Henry must have Donwell.  I cannot at all consent to
Mr. Knightley's marrying; and I am sure it is not at all likely. 
I am amazed that you should think of such a thing."
"My dear Emma, I have told you what led me to think of it. 
I do not want the match--I do not want to injure dear little Henry--
but the idea has been given me by circumstances; and if Mr. Knightley
really wished to marry, you would not have him refrain on Henry's
account, a boy of six years old, who knows nothing of the matter?"
"Yes, I would.  I could not bear to have Henry supplanted.--
Mr. Knightley marry!--No, I have never had such an idea, and I
cannot adopt it now.  And Jane Fairfax, too, of all women!"
"Nay, she has always been a first favourite with him, as you
"I am not speaking of its prudence; merely its probability."
"I see no probability in it, unless you have any better foundation
than what you mention.  His good-nature, his humanity, as I tell you,
would be quite enough to account for the horses.  He has a great
regard for the Bateses, you know, independent of Jane Fairfax--
and is always glad to shew them attention.  My dear Mrs. Weston,
do not take to match-making.  You do it very ill.  Jane Fairfax mistress
of the Abbey!--Oh! no, no;--every feeling revolts.  For his own sake,
"Imprudent, if you please--but not mad.  Excepting inequality of fortune,
and perhaps a little disparity of age, I can see nothing unsuitable."
"But Mr. Knightley does not want to marry.  I am sure he has not the
least idea of it.  Do not put it into his head.  Why should he marry?--
He is as happy as possible by himself; with his farm, and his sheep,
and his library, and all the parish to manage; and he is extremely
fond of his brother's children.  He has no occasion to marry,
"My dear Emma, as long as he thinks so, it is so; but if he really
"Nonsense!  He does not care about Jane Fairfax.  In the way
of love, I am sure he does not.  He would do any good to her,
"Well," said Mrs. Weston, laughing, "perhaps the greatest good he
could do them, would be to give Jane such a respectable home."
"If it would be good to her, I am sure it would be evil to himself;
a very shameful and degrading connexion.  How would he bear to have
Miss Bates belonging to him?--To have her haunting the Abbey,
and thanking him all day long for his great kindness in marrying Jane?--
`So very kind and obliging!--But he always had been such a very
kind neighbour!'  And then fly off, through half a sentence,
to her mother's old petticoat.  `Not that it was such a very old
petticoat either--for still it would last a great while--and, indeed,
she must thankfully say that their petticoats were all very strong.'"
"For shame, Emma!  Do not mimic her.  You divert me against
my conscience.  And, upon my word, I do not think Mr. Knightley would
be much disturbed by Miss Bates.  Little things do not irritate him. 
She might talk on; and if he wanted to say any thing himself, he would
only talk louder, and drown her voice.  But the question is not,
whether it would be a bad connexion for him, but whether he wishes it;
and I think he does.  I have heard him speak, and so must you,
so very highly of Jane Fairfax!  The interest he takes in her--
his anxiety about her health--his concern that she should have no
happier prospect!  I have heard him express himself so warmly on
those points!--Such an admirer of her performance on the pianoforte,
and of her voice!  I have heard him say that he could listen to her
for ever.  Oh! and I had almost forgotten one idea that occurred
to me--this pianoforte that has been sent here by somebody--
though we have all been so well satisfied to consider it a present
from the Campbells, may it not be from Mr. Knightley?  I cannot
help suspecting him.  I think he is just the person to do it,
"Then it can be no argument to prove that he is in love. 
But I do not think it is at all a likely thing for him to do. 
"I have heard him lamenting her having no instrument repeatedly;
oftener than I should suppose such a circumstance would, in the common
"Very well; and if he had intended to give her one, he would have
"There might be scruples of delicacy, my dear Emma.  I have a very
strong notion that it comes from him.  I am sure he was particularly
"You take up an idea, Mrs. Weston, and run away with it; as you have
many a time reproached me with doing.  I see no sign of attachment--
I believe nothing of the pianoforte--and proof only shall convince
me that Mr. Knightley has any thought of marrying Jane Fairfax."
They combated the point some time longer in the same way; Emma rather
gaining ground over the mind of her friend; for Mrs. Weston was
the most used of the two to yield; till a little bustle in the room
shewed them that tea was over, and the instrument in preparation;--
and at the same moment Mr. Cole approaching to entreat Miss Woodhouse
would do them the honour of trying it.  Frank Churchill, of whom,
in the eagerness of her conversation with Mrs. Weston, she had been
seeing nothing, except that he had found a seat by Miss Fairfax,
followed Mr. Cole, to add his very pressing entreaties; and as,
in every respect, it suited Emma best to lead, she gave a very
She knew the limitations of her own powers too well to attempt
more than she could perform with credit; she wanted neither taste
nor spirit in the little things which are generally acceptable,
and could accompany her own voice well.  One accompaniment to her song
took her agreeably by surprize--a second, slightly but correctly
taken by Frank Churchill.  Her pardon was duly begged at the close
of the song, and every thing usual followed.  He was accused
of having a delightful voice, and a perfect knowledge of music;
which was properly denied; and that he knew nothing of the matter,
and had no voice at all, roundly asserted.  They sang together
once more; and Emma would then resign her place to Miss Fairfax,
whose performance, both vocal and instrumental, she never could
attempt to conceal from herself, was infinitely superior to her own.
With mixed feelings, she seated herself at a little distance from the
numbers round the instrument, to listen.  Frank Churchill sang again. 
They had sung together once or twice, it appeared, at Weymouth. 
But the sight of Mr. Knightley among the most attentive, soon drew
away half Emma's mind; and she fell into a train of thinking
on the subject of Mrs. Weston's suspicions, to which the sweet
sounds of the united voices gave only momentary interruptions. 
Her objections to Mr. Knightley's marrying did not in the least subside. 
She could see nothing but evil in it.  It would be a great
disappointment to Mr. John Knightley; consequently to Isabella. 
A real injury to the children--a most mortifying change,
and material loss to them all;--a very great deduction from her
father's daily comfort--and, as to herself, she could not at all
endure the idea of Jane Fairfax at Donwell Abbey.  A Mrs. Knightley
for them all to give way to!--No--Mr. Knightley must never marry. 
Presently Mr. Knightley looked back, and came and sat down by her. 
They talked at first only of the performance.  His admiration
was certainly very warm; yet she thought, but for Mrs. Weston,
it would not have struck her.  As a sort of touchstone, however,
she began to speak of his kindness in conveying the aunt and niece;
and though his answer was in the spirit of cutting the matter short,
she believed it to indicate only his disinclination to dwell on any
"I often feel concern," said she, "that I dare not make our carriage
more useful on such occasions.  It is not that I am without the wish;
but you know how impossible my father would deem it that James
"Quite out of the question, quite out of the question," he replied;--
"but you must often wish it, I am sure."  And he smiled with such
seeming pleasure at the conviction, that she must proceed another step.
"This present from the Campbells," said she--"this pianoforte
"Yes," he replied, and without the smallest apparent embarrassment.--
"But they would have done better had they given her notice of it. 
Surprizes are foolish things.  The pleasure is not enhanced, and the
inconvenience is often considerable.  I should have expected better
From that moment, Emma could have taken her oath that Mr. Knightley
had had no concern in giving the instrument.  But whether he
were entirely free from peculiar attachment--whether there
were no actual preference--remained a little longer doubtful. 
Towards the end of Jane's second song, her voice grew thick.
"That will do," said he, when it was finished, thinking aloud--
"you have sung quite enough for one evening--now be quiet."
Another song, however, was soon begged for.  "One more;--they would
not fatigue Miss Fairfax on any account, and would only ask for
one more."  And Frank Churchill was heard to say, "I think you could
manage this without effort; the first part is so very trifling. 
"That fellow," said he, indignantly, "thinks of nothing but shewing
off his own voice.  This must not be."  And touching Miss Bates,
who at that moment passed near--"Miss Bates, are you mad, to let
your niece sing herself hoarse in this manner?  Go, and interfere. 
Miss Bates, in her real anxiety for Jane, could hardly stay even
to be grateful, before she stept forward and put an end to all
farther singing.  Here ceased the concert part of the evening,
for Miss Woodhouse and Miss Fairfax were the only young lady performers;
but soon (within five minutes) the proposal of dancing--
originating nobody exactly knew where--was so effectually promoted
by Mr. and Mrs. Cole, that every thing was rapidly clearing away,
to give proper space.  Mrs. Weston, capital in her country-dances,
was seated, and beginning an irresistible waltz; and Frank Churchill,
coming up with most becoming gallantry to Emma, had secured her hand,
While waiting till the other young people could pair themselves off,
Emma found time, in spite of the compliments she was receiving on her
voice and her taste, to look about, and see what became of Mr. Knightley. 
This would be a trial.  He was no dancer in general.  If he were to be
very alert in engaging Jane Fairfax now, it might augur something. 
There was no immediate appearance.  No; he was talking to Mrs. Cole--
he was looking on unconcerned; Jane was asked by somebody else,
Emma had no longer an alarm for Henry; his interest was yet safe;
and she led off the dance with genuine spirit and enjoyment. 
Not more than five couple could be mustered; but the rarity and the
suddenness of it made it very delightful, and she found herself well
matched in a partner.  They were a couple worth looking at.
Two dances, unfortunately, were all that could be allowed. 
It was growing late, and Miss Bates became anxious to get home,
on her mother's account.  After some attempts, therefore, to be
permitted to begin again, they were obliged to thank Mrs. Weston,
"Perhaps it is as well," said Frank Churchill, as he attended Emma
to her carriage.  "I must have asked Miss Fairfax, and her languid
dancing would not have agreed with me, after your's."
Emma did not repent her condescension in going to the Coles. 
The visit afforded her many pleasant recollections the next day;
and all that she might be supposed to have lost on the side
of dignified seclusion, must be amply repaid in the splendour
of popularity.  She must have delighted the Coles--worthy people,
who deserved to be made happy!--And left a name behind her that would
Perfect happiness, even in memory, is not common; and there were
two points on which she was not quite easy.  She doubted whether
she had not transgressed the duty of woman by woman, in betraying
her suspicions of Jane Fairfax's feelings to Frank Churchill. 
It was hardly right; but it had been so strong an idea, that it
would escape her, and his submission to all that she told,
was a compliment to her penetration, which made it difficult
for her to be quite certain that she ought to have held her tongue.
The other circumstance of regret related also to Jane Fairfax;
and there she had no doubt.  She did unfeignedly and unequivocally
regret the inferiority of her own playing and singing.  She did
most heartily grieve over the idleness of her childhood--and sat
She was then interrupted by Harriet's coming in; and if Harriet's
praise could have satisfied her, she might soon have been comforted.
"Oh! if I could but play as well as you and Miss Fairfax!"
"Don't class us together, Harriet.  My playing is no more like
"Oh! dear--I think you play the best of the two.  I think you play
quite as well as she does.  I am sure I had much rather hear you. 
"Those who knew any thing about it, must have felt the difference. 
The truth is, Harriet, that my playing is just good enough to be praised,
"Well, I always shall think that you play quite as well as she does,
or that if there is any difference nobody would ever find it out. 
Mr. Cole said how much taste you had; and Mr. Frank Churchill talked
a great deal about your taste, and that he valued taste much more
"Are you sure?  I saw she had execution, but I did not know she had
any taste.  Nobody talked about it.  And I hate Italian singing.--
There is no understanding a word of it.  Besides, if she does play
so very well, you know, it is no more than she is obliged to do,
because she will have to teach.  The Coxes were wondering last night
whether she would get into any great family.  How did you think the
"They told me something," said Harriet rather hesitatingly;"
Emma was obliged to ask what they had told her, though fearful
"They told me---that Mr. Martin dined with them last Saturday."
"He came to their father upon some business, and he asked him
"They talked a great deal about him, especially Anne Cox. 
I do not know what she meant, but she asked me if I thought I
"She meant to be impertinently curious, just as such an Anne Cox
"She said he was very agreeable the day he dined there.  He sat
by her at dinner.  Miss Nash thinks either of the Coxes would
"Very likely.--I think they are, without exception, the most vulgar
Harriet had business at Ford's.--Emma thought it most prudent to go
with her.  Another accidental meeting with the Martins was possible,
Harriet, tempted by every thing and swayed by half a word, was always
very long at a purchase; and while she was still hanging over muslins
and changing her mind, Emma went to the door for amusement.--Much could
not be hoped from the traffic of even the busiest part of Highbury;--
Mr. Perry walking hastily by, Mr. William Cox letting himself in at
the office-door, Mr. Cole's carriage-horses returning from exercise,
or a stray letter-boy on an obstinate mule, were the liveliest
objects she could presume to expect; and when her eyes fell only on
the butcher with his tray, a tidy old woman travelling homewards from
shop with her full basket, two curs quarrelling over a dirty bone,
and a string of dawdling children round the baker's little bow-window
eyeing the gingerbread, she knew she had no reason to complain,
and was amused enough; quite enough still to stand at the door. 
A mind lively and at ease, can do with seeing nothing, and can see
She looked down the Randalls road.  The scene enlarged;
two persons appeared; Mrs. Weston and her son-in-law; they were
walking into Highbury;--to Hartfield of course.  They were stopping,
however, in the first place at Mrs. Bates's; whose house was
a little nearer Randalls than Ford's; and had all but knocked,
when Emma caught their eye.--Immediately they crossed the road
and came forward to her; and the agreeableness of yesterday's
engagement seemed to give fresh pleasure to the present meeting. 
Mrs. Weston informed her that she was going to call on the Bateses,
"For my companion tells me," said she, "that I absolutely promised
Miss Bates last night, that I would come this morning.  I was
not aware of it myself.  I did not know that I had fixed a day,
"And while Mrs. Weston pays her visit, I may be allowed, I hope,"
said Frank Churchill, "to join your party and wait for her at Hartfield--
"I thought you meant to go with me.  They would be very much pleased."
"Me!  I should be quite in the way.  But, perhaps--I may be equally
in the way here.  Miss Woodhouse looks as if she did not want me. 
My aunt always sends me off when she is shopping.  She says I fidget
her to death; and Miss Woodhouse looks as if she could almost say
"I am here on no business of my own," said Emma; "I am only waiting
for my friend.  She will probably have soon done, and then we
shall go home.  But you had better go with Mrs. Weston and hear
"Well--if you advise it.--But (with a smile) if Colonel Campbell
should have employed a careless friend, and if it should prove
to have an indifferent tone--what shall I say?  I shall be no
support to Mrs. Weston.  She might do very well by herself. 
A disagreeable truth would be palatable through her lips, but I
am the wretchedest being in the world at a civil falsehood."
"I do not believe any such thing," replied Emma.--"I am persuaded
that you can be as insincere as your neighbours, when it is necessary;
but there is no reason to suppose the instrument is indifferent. 
Quite otherwise indeed, if I understood Miss Fairfax's opinion
"Do come with me," said Mrs. Weston, "if it be not very disagreeable
to you.  It need not detain us long.  We will go to Hartfield afterwards. 
We will follow them to Hartfield.  I really wish you to call with me. 
It will be felt so great an attention! and I always thought you
He could say no more; and with the hope of Hartfield to reward him,
returned with Mrs. Weston to Mrs. Bates's door.  Emma watched them in,
and then joined Harriet at the interesting counter,--trying, with all
the force of her own mind, to convince her that if she wanted plain
muslin it was of no use to look at figured; and that a blue ribbon,
be it ever so beautiful, would still never match her yellow pattern. 
At last it was all settled, even to the destination of the parcel.
"Should I send it to Mrs. Goddard's, ma'am?" asked Mrs. Ford.--
"Yes--no--yes, to Mrs. Goddard's. Only my pattern gown is
at Hartfield.  No, you shall send it to Hartfield, if you please. 
But then, Mrs. Goddard will want to see it.--And I could take the
pattern gown home any day.  But I shall want the ribbon directly--
so it had better go to Hartfield--at least the ribbon.  You could
make it into two parcels, Mrs. Ford, could not you?"
"It is not worth while, Harriet, to give Mrs. Ford the trouble
"No trouble in the world, ma'am," said the obliging Mrs. Ford.
"Oh! but indeed I would much rather have it only in one. 
Then, if you please, you shall send it all to Mrs. Goddard's--
I do not know--No, I think, Miss Woodhouse, I may just as well
have it sent to Hartfield, and take it home with me at night. 
"That you do not give another half-second to the subject. 
"Aye, that will be much best," said Harriet, quite satisfied,
"I should not at all like to have it sent to Mrs. Goddard's."
Voices approached the shop--or rather one voice and two ladies: 
"My dear Miss Woodhouse," said the latter, "I am just run across to
entreat the favour of you to come and sit down with us a little while,
and give us your opinion of our new instrument; you and Miss Smith. 
How do you do, Miss Smith?--Very well I thank you.--And I begged
Mrs. Weston to come with me, that I might be sure of succeeding."
"Very well, I am much obliged to you.  My mother is delightfully well;
and Jane caught no cold last night.  How is Mr. Woodhouse?--I am so glad
to hear such a good account.  Mrs. Weston told me you were here.--
Oh! then, said I, I must run across, I am sure Miss Woodhouse will
allow me just to run across and entreat her to come in; my mother
will be so very happy to see her--and now we are such a nice party,
she cannot refuse.--`Aye, pray do,' said Mr. Frank Churchill,
`Miss Woodhouse's opinion of the instrument will be worth having.'--
But, said I, I shall be more sure of succeeding if one of you will go
with me.--`Oh,' said he, `wait half a minute, till I have finished
my job;'--For, would you believe it, Miss Woodhouse, there he is,
in the most obliging manner in the world, fastening in the rivet of my
mother's spectacles.--The rivet came out, you know, this morning.--
So very obliging!--For my mother had no use of her spectacles--
could not put them on.  And, by the bye, every body ought to have
two pair of spectacles; they should indeed.  Jane said so. 
I meant to take them over to John Saunders the first thing I did,
but something or other hindered me all the morning; first one thing,
then another, there is no saying what, you know.  At one time Patty came
to say she thought the kitchen chimney wanted sweeping.  Oh, said I,
Patty do not come with your bad news to me.  Here is the rivet
of your mistress's spectacles out.  Then the baked apples came home,
Mrs. Wallis sent them by her boy; they are extremely civil and
obliging to us, the Wallises, always--I have heard some people
say that Mrs. Wallis can be uncivil and give a very rude answer,
but we have never known any thing but the greatest attention
from them.  And it cannot be for the value of our custom now,
for what is our consumption of bread, you know?  Only three of us.--
besides dear Jane at present--and she really eats nothing--makes such
a shocking breakfast, you would be quite frightened if you saw it. 
I dare not let my mother know how little she eats--so I say one
thing and then I say another, and it passes off.  But about the
middle of the day she gets hungry, and there is nothing she likes
so well as these baked apples, and they are extremely wholesome,
for I took the opportunity the other day of asking Mr. Perry;
I happened to meet him in the street.  Not that I had any doubt before--
I have so often heard Mr. Woodhouse recommend a baked apple. 
I believe it is the only way that Mr. Woodhouse thinks the
fruit thoroughly wholesome.  We have apple-dumplings, however,
very often.  Patty makes an excellent apple-dumpling. Well,
Mrs. Weston, you have prevailed, I hope, and these ladies will
Emma would be "very happy to wait on Mrs. Bates, &c.," and they
did at last move out of the shop, with no farther delay from Miss
"How do you do, Mrs. Ford?  I beg your pardon.  I did not see
you before.  I hear you have a charming collection of new ribbons
from town.  Jane came back delighted yesterday.  Thank ye,
the gloves do very well--only a little too large about the wrist;
"What was I talking of?" said she, beginning again when they were
Emma wondered on what, of all the medley, she would fix.
"I declare I cannot recollect what I was talking of.--Oh! my
mother's spectacles.  So very obliging of Mr. Frank Churchill! 
`Oh!' said he, `I do think I can fasten the rivet; I like a job
of this kind excessively.'--Which you know shewed him to be so
very. . . . Indeed I must say that, much as I had heard of him
before and much as I had expected, he very far exceeds any
thing. . . . I do congratulate you, Mrs. Weston, most warmly. 
He seems every thing the fondest parent could. . . . `Oh!' said he,
`I can fasten the rivet.  I like a job of that sort excessively.' 
I never shall forget his manner.  And when I brought out the baked
apples from the closet, and hoped our friends would be so very
obliging as to take some, `Oh!' said he directly, `there is nothing
in the way of fruit half so good, and these are the finest-looking
home-baked apples I ever saw in my life.'  That, you know, was so
very. . . . And I am sure, by his manner, it was no compliment. 
Indeed they are very delightful apples, and Mrs. Wallis does them
full justice--only we do not have them baked more than twice,
and Mr. Woodhouse made us promise to have them done three times--
but Miss Woodhouse will be so good as not to mention it.  The apples
themselves are the very finest sort for baking, beyond a doubt;
all from Donwell--some of Mr. Knightley's most liberal supply. 
He sends us a sack every year; and certainly there never was such
a keeping apple anywhere as one of his trees--I believe there
is two of them.  My mother says the orchard was always famous
in her younger days.  But I was really quite shocked the other day--
for Mr. Knightley called one morning, and Jane was eating these apples,
and we talked about them and said how much she enjoyed them,
and he asked whether we were not got to the end of our stock. 
`I am sure you must be,' said he, `and I will send you
another supply; for I have a great many more than I can ever use. 
William Larkins let me keep a larger quantity than usual this year. 
I will send you some more, before they get good for nothing.' 
So I begged he would not--for really as to ours being gone, I could
not absolutely say that we had a great many left--it was but half
a dozen indeed; but they should be all kept for Jane; and I could
not at all bear that he should be sending us more, so liberal as he
had been already; and Jane said the same.  And when he was gone,
she almost quarrelled with me--No, I should not say quarrelled,
for we never had a quarrel in our lives; but she was quite distressed
that I had owned the apples were so nearly gone; she wished I had
made him believe we had a great many left.  Oh, said I, my dear,
I did say as much as I could.  However, the very same evening
William Larkins came over with a large basket of apples, the same
sort of apples, a bushel at least, and I was very much obliged,
and went down and spoke to William Larkins and said every thing,
as you may suppose.  William Larkins is such an old acquaintance! 
I am always glad to see him.  But, however, I found afterwards
from Patty, that William said it was all the apples of that sort
his master had; he had brought them all--and now his master had not
one left to bake or boil.  William did not seem to mind it himself,
he was so pleased to think his master had sold so many; for William,
you know, thinks more of his master's profit than any thing;
but Mrs. Hodges, he said, was quite displeased at their being
all sent away.  She could not bear that her master should not be
able to have another apple-tart this spring.  He told Patty this,
but bid her not mind it, and be sure not to say any thing to us
about it, for Mrs. Hodges would be cross sometimes, and as long as
so many sacks were sold, it did not signify who ate the remainder. 
And so Patty told me, and I was excessively shocked indeed! 
I would not have Mr. Knightley know any thing about it for
the world!  He would be so very. . . . I wanted to keep it from
Jane's knowledge; but, unluckily, I had mentioned it before I was
Miss Bates had just done as Patty opened the door; and her visitors
walked upstairs without having any regular narration to attend to,
pursued only by the sounds of her desultory good-will.
"Pray take care, Mrs. Weston, there is a step at the turning. 
Pray take care, Miss Woodhouse, ours is rather a dark staircase--
rather darker and narrower than one could wish.  Miss Smith,
pray take care.  Miss Woodhouse, I am quite concerned, I am sure you
hit your foot.  Miss Smith, the step at the turning."
The appearance of the little sitting-room as they entered,
was tranquillity itself; Mrs. Bates, deprived of her usual employment,
slumbering on one side of the fire, Frank Churchill, at a table
near her, most deedily occupied about her spectacles, and Jane Fairfax,
standing with her back to them, intent on her pianoforte.
Busy as he was, however, the young man was yet able to shew a most
"This is a pleasure," said he, in rather a low voice, "coming at
least ten minutes earlier than I had calculated.  You find me
trying to be useful; tell me if you think I shall succeed."
"What!" said Mrs. Weston, "have not you finished it yet? you would
not earn a very good livelihood as a working silversmith at this rate."
"I have not been working uninterruptedly," he replied, "I have been
assisting Miss Fairfax in trying to make her instrument stand steadily,
it was not quite firm; an unevenness in the floor, I believe. 
You see we have been wedging one leg with paper.  This was very kind
of you to be persuaded to come.  I was almost afraid you would be
He contrived that she should be seated by him; and was sufficiently
employed in looking out the best baked apple for her, and trying
to make her help or advise him in his work, till Jane Fairfax was
quite ready to sit down to the pianoforte again.  That she was not
immediately ready, Emma did suspect to arise from the state of her nerves;
she had not yet possessed the instrument long enough to touch it
without emotion; she must reason herself into the power of performance;
and Emma could not but pity such feelings, whatever their origin,
and could not but resolve never to expose them to her neighbour again.
At last Jane began, and though the first bars were feebly given,
the powers of the instrument were gradually done full justice to. 
Mrs. Weston had been delighted before, and was delighted again;
Emma joined her in all her praise; and the pianoforte, with every
proper discrimination, was pronounced to be altogether of the
"Whoever Colonel Campbell might employ," said Frank Churchill,
with a smile at Emma, "the person has not chosen ill.  I heard a good
deal of Colonel Campbell's taste at Weymouth; and the softness of the
upper notes I am sure is exactly what he and all that party would
particularly prize.  I dare say, Miss Fairfax, that he either gave
his friend very minute directions, or wrote to Broadwood himself. 
Jane did not look round.  She was not obliged to hear.  Mrs. Weston
"It is not fair," said Emma, in a whisper; "mine was a random guess. 
He shook his head with a smile, and looked as if he had very little
doubt and very little mercy.  Soon afterwards he began again,
"How much your friends in Ireland must be enjoying your pleasure
on this occasion, Miss Fairfax.  I dare say they often think of you,
and wonder which will be the day, the precise day of the instrument's
coming to hand.  Do you imagine Colonel Campbell knows the business
to be going forward just at this time?--Do you imagine it to be
the consequence of an immediate commission from him, or that he may
have sent only a general direction, an order indefinite as to time,
He paused.  She could not but hear; she could not avoid answering,
"Till I have a letter from Colonel Campbell," said she, in a voice
of forced calmness, "I can imagine nothing with any confidence. 
"Conjecture--aye, sometimes one conjectures right, and sometimes
one conjectures wrong.  I wish I could conjecture how soon I shall
make this rivet quite firm.  What nonsense one talks, Miss Woodhouse,
when hard at work, if one talks at all;--your real workmen,
I suppose, hold their tongues; but we gentlemen labourers if we get
hold of a word--Miss Fairfax said something about conjecturing. 
There, it is done.  I have the pleasure, madam, (to Mrs. Bates,)
of restoring your spectacles, healed for the present."
He was very warmly thanked both by mother and daughter; to escape
a little from the latter, he went to the pianoforte, and begged
Miss Fairfax, who was still sitting at it, to play something more.
"If you are very kind," said he, "it will be one of the waltzes
we danced last night;--let me live them over again.  You did not
enjoy them as I did; you appeared tired the whole time.  I believe
you were glad we danced no longer; but I would have given worlds--
all the worlds one ever has to give--for another half-hour."
"What felicity it is to hear a tune again which has made one happy!--
She looked up at him for a moment, coloured deeply, and played
something else.  He took some music from a chair near the pianoforte,
"Here is something quite new to me.  Do you know it?--Cramer.--
And here are a new set of Irish melodies.  That, from such a quarter,
one might expect.  This was all sent with the instrument.  Very thoughtful
of Colonel Campbell, was not it?--He knew Miss Fairfax could have
no music here.  I honour that part of the attention particularly;
it shews it to have been so thoroughly from the heart.  Nothing hastily
done; nothing incomplete.  True affection only could have prompted it."
Emma wished he would be less pointed, yet could not help being amused;
and when on glancing her eye towards Jane Fairfax she caught
the remains of a smile, when she saw that with all the deep blush
of consciousness, there had been a smile of secret delight,
she had less scruple in the amusement, and much less compunction
with respect to her.--This amiable, upright, perfect Jane Fairfax
was apparently cherishing very reprehensible feelings.
He brought all the music to her, and they looked it over together.--
"I hope she does.  I would have her understand me.  I am not
"But really, I am half ashamed, and wish I had never taken up
"I am very glad you did, and that you communicated it to me. 
I have now a key to all her odd looks and ways.  Leave shame to her. 
"I do not see much sign of it.  She is playing Robin Adair
Shortly afterwards Miss Bates, passing near the window,
"Mr. Knightley I declare!--I must speak to him if possible,
just to thank him.  I will not open the window here; it would give
you all cold; but I can go into my mother's room you know.  I dare
say he will come in when he knows who is here.  Quite delightful
to have you all meet so!--Our little room so honoured!"
She was in the adjoining chamber while she still spoke, and opening
the casement there, immediately called Mr. Knightley's attention,
and every syllable of their conversation was as distinctly heard
by the others, as if it had passed within the same apartment.
"How d' ye do?--how d'ye do?--Very well, I thank you.  So obliged
to you for the carriage last night.  We were just in time;
my mother just ready for us.  Pray come in; do come in.  You will
So began Miss Bates; and Mr. Knightley seemed determined to be heard
in his turn, for most resolutely and commandingly did he say,
"How is your niece, Miss Bates?--I want to inquire after you all,
but particularly your niece.  How is Miss Fairfax?--I hope she
caught no cold last night.  How is she to-day? Tell me how Miss
And Miss Bates was obliged to give a direct answer before he
would hear her in any thing else.  The listeners were amused;
and Mrs. Weston gave Emma a look of particular meaning.  But Emma
"So obliged to you!--so very much obliged to you for the carriage,"
"I am going to Kingston.  Can I do anything for you?"
"Oh! dear, Kingston--are you?--Mrs. Cole was saying the other day
"Mrs. Cole has servants to send.  Can I do any thing for you?"
"No, I thank you.  But do come in.  Who do you think is here?--
Miss Woodhouse and Miss Smith; so kind as to call to hear the
new pianoforte.  Do put up your horse at the Crown, and come in."
"Well," said he, in a deliberating manner, "for five minutes, perhaps."
"And here is Mrs. Weston and Mr. Frank Churchill too!--Quite delightful;
"No, not now, I thank you.  I could not stay two minutes. 
"Oh! do come in.  They will be so very happy to see you."
"No, no; your room is full enough.  I will call another day,
"Well, I am so sorry!--Oh!  Mr. Knightley, what a delightful party
last night; how extremely pleasant.--Did you ever see such dancing?--
Was not it delightful?--Miss Woodhouse and Mr. Frank Churchill;
"Oh! very delightful indeed; I can say nothing less, for I suppose
Miss Woodhouse and Mr. Frank Churchill are hearing every thing
that passes.  And (raising his voice still more) I do not see why Miss
Fairfax should not be mentioned too.  I think Miss Fairfax dances
very well; and Mrs. Weston is the very best country-dance player,
without exception, in England.  Now, if your friends have any gratitude,
they will say something pretty loud about you and me in return;
"Oh!  Mr. Knightley, one moment more; something of consequence--
so shocked!--Jane and I are both so shocked about the apples!"
"To think of your sending us all your store apples.  You said you had
a great many, and now you have not one left.  We really are so shocked! 
Mrs. Hodges may well be angry.  William Larkins mentioned it here. 
You should not have done it, indeed you should not.  Ah! he is off. 
He never can bear to be thanked.  But I thought he would have staid now,
and it would have been a pity not to have mentioned. . . . Well,
(returning to the room,) I have not been able to succeed. 
Mr. Knightley cannot stop.  He is going to Kingston.  He asked me
"Yes," said Jane, "we heard his kind offers, we heard every thing."
"Oh! yes, my dear, I dare say you might, because you know, the door
was open, and the window was open, and Mr. Knightley spoke loud. 
You must have heard every thing to be sure.  `Can I do any thing
for you at Kingston?' said he; so I just mentioned. . . . Oh! 
Miss Woodhouse, must you be going?--You seem but just come--so very
Emma found it really time to be at home; the visit had already
lasted long; and on examining watches, so much of the morning was
perceived to be gone, that Mrs. Weston and her companion taking
leave also, could allow themselves only to walk with the two young
ladies to Hartfield gates, before they set off for Randalls.
It may be possible to do without dancing entirely.  Instances have
been known of young people passing many, many months successively,
without being at any ball of any description, and no material injury
accrue either to body or mind;--but when a beginning is made--
when the felicities of rapid motion have once been, though slightly,
felt--it must be a very heavy set that does not ask for more.
Frank Churchill had danced once at Highbury, and longed to dance again;
and the last half-hour of an evening which Mr. Woodhouse was persuaded
to spend with his daughter at Randalls, was passed by the two young
people in schemes on the subject.  Frank's was the first idea;
and his the greatest zeal in pursuing it; for the lady was the best
judge of the difficulties, and the most solicitous for accommodation
and appearance.  But still she had inclination enough for shewing
people again how delightfully Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss
Woodhouse danced--for doing that in which she need not blush to compare
herself with Jane Fairfax--and even for simple dancing itself,
without any of the wicked aids of vanity--to assist him first
in pacing out the room they were in to see what it could be made
to hold--and then in taking the dimensions of the other parlour,
in the hope of discovering, in spite of all that Mr. Weston could
say of their exactly equal size, that it was a little the largest.
His first proposition and request, that the dance begun at Mr. Cole's
should be finished there--that the same party should be collected,
and the same musician engaged, met with the readiest acquiescence. 
Mr. Weston entered into the idea with thorough enjoyment,
and Mrs. Weston most willingly undertook to play as long as they
could wish to dance; and the interesting employment had followed,
of reckoning up exactly who there would be, and portioning out the
"You and Miss Smith, and Miss Fairfax, will be three, and the two
Miss Coxes five," had been repeated many times over.  "And there
will be the two Gilberts, young Cox, my father, and myself,
besides Mr. Knightley.  Yes, that will be quite enough for pleasure. 
You and Miss Smith, and Miss Fairfax, will be three, and the two Miss
Coxes five; and for five couple there will be plenty of room."
"But will there be good room for five couple?--I really do not think
"And after all, five couple are not enough to make it worth
while to stand up.  Five couple are nothing, when one thinks
seriously about it.  It will not do to invite five couple. 
It can be allowable only as the thought of the moment."
Somebody said that Miss Gilbert was expected at her brother's,
and must be invited with the rest.  Somebody else believed
Mrs. Gilbert would have danced the other evening, if she had
been asked.  A word was put in for a second young Cox; and at last,
Mr. Weston naming one family of cousins who must be included,
and another of very old acquaintance who could not be left out,
it became a certainty that the five couple would be at least ten,
and a very interesting speculation in what possible manner they
The doors of the two rooms were just opposite each other. 
"Might not they use both rooms, and dance across the passage?" 
It seemed the best scheme; and yet it was not so good but that
many of them wanted a better.  Emma said it would be awkward;
Mrs. Weston was in distress about the supper; and Mr. Woodhouse
opposed it earnestly, on the score of health.  It made him so
very unhappy, indeed, that it could not be persevered in.
"Oh! no," said he; "it would be the extreme of imprudence. 
I could not bear it for Emma!--Emma is not strong.  She would
catch a dreadful cold.  So would poor little Harriet. 
So you would all.  Mrs. Weston, you would be quite laid up;
do not let them talk of such a wild thing.  Pray do not let them
talk of it.  That young man (speaking lower) is very thoughtless. 
Do not tell his father, but that young man is not quite the thing. 
He has been opening the doors very often this evening, and keeping
them open very inconsiderately.  He does not think of the draught. 
I do not mean to set you against him, but indeed he is not quite
Mrs. Weston was sorry for such a charge.  She knew the importance
of it, and said every thing in her power to do it away.  Every door
was now closed, the passage plan given up, and the first scheme
of dancing only in the room they were in resorted to again;
and with such good-will on Frank Churchill's part, that the space
which a quarter of an hour before had been deemed barely sufficient
for five couple, was now endeavoured to be made out quite enough
"We were too magnificent," said he.  "We allowed unnecessary room. 
Emma demurred.  "It would be a crowd--a sad crowd; and what could
"Very true," he gravely replied; "it was very bad."  But still he
"I think there will be very tolerable room for ten couple."
"No, no," said she, "you are quite unreasonable.  It would be dreadful
to be standing so close!  Nothing can be farther from pleasure
than to be dancing in a crowd--and a crowd in a little room!"
"There is no denying it," he replied.  "I agree with you exactly. 
A crowd in a little room--Miss Woodhouse, you have the art of giving
pictures in a few words.  Exquisite, quite exquisite!--Still, however,
having proceeded so far, one is unwilling to give the matter up. 
It would be a disappointment to my father--and altogether--I do
not know that--I am rather of opinion that ten couple might stand
Emma perceived that the nature of his gallantry was a little
self-willed, and that he would rather oppose than lose the pleasure
of dancing with her; but she took the compliment, and forgave
the rest.  Had she intended ever to marry him, it might have been
worth while to pause and consider, and try to understand the value
of his preference, and the character of his temper; but for
all the purposes of their acquaintance, he was quite amiable enough.
Before the middle of the next day, he was at Hartfield; and he entered
the room with such an agreeable smile as certified the continuance
of the scheme.  It soon appeared that he came to announce an improvement.
"Well, Miss Woodhouse," he almost immediately began, "your inclination
for dancing has not been quite frightened away, I hope, by the
terrors of my father's little rooms.  I bring a new proposal
on the subject:--a thought of my father's, which waits only your
approbation to be acted upon.  May I hope for the honour of your
hand for the two first dances of this little projected ball,
to be given, not at Randalls, but at the Crown Inn?"
"Yes; if you and Mr. Woodhouse see no objection, and I trust you cannot,
my father hopes his friends will be so kind as to visit him there. 
Better accommodations, he can promise them, and not a less grateful
welcome than at Randalls.  It is his own idea.  Mrs. Weston sees
no objection to it, provided you are satisfied.  This is what we
all feel.  Oh! you were perfectly right!  Ten couple, in either of
the Randalls rooms, would have been insufferable!--Dreadful!--I felt
how right you were the whole time, but was too anxious for securing
any thing to like to yield.  Is not it a good exchange?--You consent--
"It appears to me a plan that nobody can object to, if Mr. and
Mrs. Weston do not.  I think it admirable; and, as far as I can
answer for myself, shall be most happy--It seems the only improvement
that could be.  Papa, do you not think it an excellent improvement?"
She was obliged to repeat and explain it, before it was fully
comprehended; and then, being quite new, farther representations
"No; he thought it very far from an improvement--a very bad plan--
much worse than the other.  A room at an inn was always damp
and dangerous; never properly aired, or fit to be inhabited. 
If they must dance, they had better dance at Randalls.  He had never
been in the room at the Crown in his life--did not know the people
who kept it by sight.--Oh! no--a very bad plan.  They would catch
"I was going to observe, sir," said Frank Churchill,
"that one of the great recommendations of this change would
be the very little danger of any body's catching cold--
so much less danger at the Crown than at Randalls!  Mr. Perry
might have reason to regret the alteration, but nobody else could."
"Sir," said Mr. Woodhouse, rather warmly, "you are very much
mistaken if you suppose Mr. Perry to be that sort of character. 
Mr. Perry is extremely concerned when any of us are ill.  But I
do not understand how the room at the Crown can be safer for you
"From the very circumstance of its being larger, sir.  We shall have
no occasion to open the windows at all--not once the whole evening;
and it is that dreadful habit of opening the windows, letting in cold
air upon heated bodies, which (as you well know, sir) does the mischief."
"Open the windows!--but surely, Mr. Churchill, nobody would think
of opening the windows at Randalls.  Nobody could be so imprudent! 
I never heard of such a thing.  Dancing with open windows!--I am sure,
neither your father nor Mrs. Weston (poor Miss Taylor that was)
"Ah! sir--but a thoughtless young person will sometimes step behind
a window-curtain, and throw up a sash, without its being suspected. 
"Have you indeed, sir?--Bless me!  I never could have supposed it. 
But I live out of the world, and am often astonished at what I hear. 
However, this does make a difference; and, perhaps, when we come
to talk it over--but these sort of things require a good deal
of consideration.  One cannot resolve upon them in a hurry. 
If Mr. and Mrs. Weston will be so obliging as to call here one morning,
"But, unfortunately, sir, my time is so limited--"
"Oh!" interrupted Emma, "there will be plenty of time for talking
every thing over.  There is no hurry at all.  If it can be contrived
to be at the Crown, papa, it will be very convenient for the horses. 
"So they will, my dear.  That is a great thing.  Not that James
ever complains; but it is right to spare our horses when we can. 
If I could be sure of the rooms being thoroughly aired--but is
Mrs. Stokes to be trusted?  I doubt it.  I do not know her,
"I can answer for every thing of that nature, sir, because it will
be under Mrs. Weston's care.  Mrs. Weston undertakes to direct
"There, papa!--Now you must be satisfied--Our own dear Mrs. Weston,
who is carefulness itself.  Do not you remember what Mr. Perry said,
so many years ago, when I had the measles?  `If Miss Taylor undertakes
to wrap Miss Emma up, you need not have any fears, sir.'  How often
have I heard you speak of it as such a compliment to her!"
"Aye, very true.  Mr. Perry did say so.  I shall never forget it. 
Poor little Emma!  You were very bad with the measles; that is,
you would have been very bad, but for Perry's great attention. 
He came four times a day for a week.  He said, from the first,
it was a very good sort--which was our great comfort; but the measles
are a dreadful complaint.  I hope whenever poor Isabella's little ones
"My father and Mrs. Weston are at the Crown at this moment,"
said Frank Churchill, "examining the capabilities of the house. 
I left them there and came on to Hartfield, impatient for your opinion,
and hoping you might be persuaded to join them and give your advice
on the spot.  I was desired to say so from both.  It would be the
greatest pleasure to them, if you could allow me to attend you there. 
Emma was most happy to be called to such a council; and her father,
engaging to think it all over while she was gone, the two young
people set off together without delay for the Crown.  There were
Mr. and Mrs. Weston; delighted to see her and receive her approbation,
very busy and very happy in their different way; she, in some
little distress; and he, finding every thing perfect.
"Emma," said she, "this paper is worse than I expected. 
Look! in places you see it is dreadfully dirty; and the wainscot
is more yellow and forlorn than any thing I could have imagined."
"My dear, you are too particular," said her husband.  "What does
all that signify?  You will see nothing of it by candlelight. 
It will be as clean as Randalls by candlelight.  We never see any
The ladies here probably exchanged looks which meant, "Men never
know when things are dirty or not;" and the gentlemen perhaps
thought each to himself, "Women will have their little nonsenses
One perplexity, however, arose, which the gentlemen did not disdain. 
It regarded a supper-room.  At the time of the ballroom's being built,
suppers had not been in question; and a small card-room adjoining,
was the only addition.  What was to be done?  This card-room would
be wanted as a card-room now; or, if cards were conveniently voted
unnecessary by their four selves, still was it not too small for
any comfortable supper?  Another room of much better size might be
secured for the purpose; but it was at the other end of the house,
and a long awkward passage must be gone through to get at it. 
This made a difficulty.  Mrs. Weston was afraid of draughts
for the young people in that passage; and neither Emma nor the
gentlemen could tolerate the prospect of being miserably crowded
Mrs. Weston proposed having no regular supper; merely sandwiches,
&c., set out in the little room; but that was scouted as a
wretched suggestion.  A private dance, without sitting down to supper,
was pronounced an infamous fraud upon the rights of men and women;
and Mrs. Weston must not speak of it again.  She then took another
line of expediency, and looking into the doubtful room, observed,
"I do not think it is so very small.  We shall not be many,
And Mr. Weston at the same time, walking briskly with long steps
"You talk a great deal of the length of this passage, my dear. 
It is a mere nothing after all; and not the least draught from
"I wish," said Mrs. Weston, "one could know which arrangement our
guests in general would like best.  To do what would be most generally
pleasing must be our object--if one could but tell what that would be."
"Yes, very true," cried Frank, "very true.  You want your neighbours'
opinions.  I do not wonder at you.  If one could ascertain what the
chief of them--the Coles, for instance.  They are not far off. 
Shall I call upon them?  Or Miss Bates?  She is still nearer.--
And I do not know whether Miss Bates is not as likely to understand
the inclinations of the rest of the people as any body.  I think
we do want a larger council.  Suppose I go and invite Miss Bates
"Well--if you please," said Mrs. Weston rather hesitating, "if you
"You will get nothing to the purpose from Miss Bates," said Emma. 
"She will be all delight and gratitude, but she will tell you nothing. 
She will not even listen to your questions.  I see no advantage in
"But she is so amusing, so extremely amusing!  I am very fond
of hearing Miss Bates talk.  And I need not bring the whole family,
Here Mr. Weston joined them, and on hearing what was proposed,
"Aye, do, Frank.--Go and fetch Miss Bates, and let us end the matter
at once.  She will enjoy the scheme, I am sure; and I do not know
a properer person for shewing us how to do away difficulties. 
Fetch Miss Bates.  We are growing a little too nice.  She is
a standing lesson of how to be happy.  But fetch them both. 
"The old lady!  No, the young lady, to be sure.  I shall think you
a great blockhead, Frank, if you bring the aunt without the niece."
"Oh!  I beg your pardon, sir.  I did not immediately recollect. 
Undoubtedly if you wish it, I will endeavour to persuade them both." 
Long before he reappeared, attending the short, neat, brisk-moving aunt,
and her elegant niece,--Mrs. Weston, like a sweet-tempered
woman and a good wife, had examined the passage again,
and found the evils of it much less than she had supposed before--
indeed very trifling; and here ended the difficulties of decision. 
All the rest, in speculation at least, was perfectly smooth. 
All the minor arrangements of table and chair, lights and music,
tea and supper, made themselves; or were left as mere trifles
to be settled at any time between Mrs. Weston and Mrs. Stokes.--
Every body invited, was certainly to come; Frank had already written
to Enscombe to propose staying a few days beyond his fortnight,
which could not possibly be refused.  And a delightful dance it was
Most cordially, when Miss Bates arrived, did she agree that it must. 
As a counsellor she was not wanted; but as an approver, (a much
safer character,) she was truly welcome.  Her approbation, at once
general and minute, warm and incessant, could not but please;
and for another half-hour they were all walking to and fro,
between the different rooms, some suggesting, some attending,
and all in happy enjoyment of the future.  The party did not break
up without Emma's being positively secured for the two first dances
by the hero of the evening, nor without her overhearing Mr. Weston
whisper to his wife, "He has asked her, my dear.  That's right. 
One thing only was wanting to make the prospect of the ball
completely satisfactory to Emma--its being fixed for a day within
the granted term of Frank Churchill's stay in Surry; for, in spite
of Mr. Weston's confidence, she could not think it so very impossible
that the Churchills might not allow their nephew to remain
a day beyond his fortnight.  But this was not judged feasible. 
The preparations must take their time, nothing could be properly
ready till the third week were entered on, and for a few days they
must be planning, proceeding and hoping in uncertainty--at the risk--
in her opinion, the great risk, of its being all in vain.
Enscombe however was gracious, gracious in fact, if not in word. 
His wish of staying longer evidently did not please; but it was
not opposed.  All was safe and prosperous; and as the removal of one
solicitude generally makes way for another, Emma, being now certain
of her ball, began to adopt as the next vexation Mr. Knightley's
provoking indifference about it.  Either because he did not
dance himself, or because the plan had been formed without his
being consulted, he seemed resolved that it should not interest him,
determined against its exciting any present curiosity, or affording
him any future amusement.  To her voluntary communications Emma
"Very well.  If the Westons think it worth while to be at all this
trouble for a few hours of noisy entertainment, I have nothing
to say against it, but that they shall not chuse pleasures for me.--
Oh! yes, I must be there; I could not refuse; and I will keep
as much awake as I can; but I would rather be at home, looking over
William Larkins's week's account; much rather, I confess.--
Pleasure in seeing dancing!--not I, indeed--I never look at it--
I do not know who does.--Fine dancing, I believe, like virtue,
must be its own reward.  Those who are standing by are usually
This Emma felt was aimed at her; and it made her quite angry. 
It was not in compliment to Jane Fairfax however that he was
so indifferent, or so indignant; he was not guided by her feelings
in reprobating the ball, for she enjoyed the thought of it
to an extraordinary degree.  It made her animated--open hearted--
"Oh!  Miss Woodhouse, I hope nothing may happen to prevent the ball. 
What a disappointment it would be!  I do look forward to it, I own,
It was not to oblige Jane Fairfax therefore that he would have
preferred the society of William Larkins.  No!--she was more and more
convinced that Mrs. Weston was quite mistaken in that surmise. 
There was a great deal of friendly and of compassionate attachment
Alas! there was soon no leisure for quarrelling with Mr. Knightley. 
Two days of joyful security were immediately followed by the
over-throw of every thing.  A letter arrived from Mr. Churchill
to urge his nephew's instant return.  Mrs. Churchill was unwell--
far too unwell to do without him; she had been in a very suffering
state (so said her husband) when writing to her nephew two days before,
though from her usual unwillingness to give pain, and constant
habit of never thinking of herself, she had not mentioned it;
but now she was too ill to trifle, and must entreat him to set off
The substance of this letter was forwarded to Emma, in a note
from Mrs. Weston, instantly.  As to his going, it was inevitable. 
He must be gone within a few hours, though without feeling any real
alarm for his aunt, to lessen his repugnance.  He knew her illnesses;
Mrs. Weston added, "that he could only allow himself time to
hurry to Highbury, after breakfast, and take leave of the few
friends there whom he could suppose to feel any interest in him;
and that he might be expected at Hartfield very soon."
This wretched note was the finale of Emma's breakfast.  When once
it had been read, there was no doing any thing, but lament
and exclaim.  The loss of the ball--the loss of the young man--
and all that the young man might be feeling!--It was too wretched!--
Such a delightful evening as it would have been!--Every body so happy!
and she and her partner the happiest!--"I said it would be so,"
Her father's feelings were quite distinct.  He thought principally
of Mrs. Churchill's illness, and wanted to know how she was treated;
and as for the ball, it was shocking to have dear Emma disappointed;
Emma was ready for her visitor some time before he appeared;
but if this reflected at all upon his impatience, his sorrowful
look and total want of spirits when he did come might redeem him. 
He felt the going away almost too much to speak of it.  His dejection
was most evident.  He sat really lost in thought for the first
few minutes; and when rousing himself, it was only to say,
"Of all horrid things, leave-taking is the worst."
"But you will come again," said Emma.  "This will not be your only
"Ah!--(shaking his head)--the uncertainty of when I may be able
to return!--I shall try for it with a zeal!--It will be the object
of all my thoughts and cares!--and if my uncle and aunt go to town
this spring--but I am afraid--they did not stir last spring--
"Ah! that ball!--why did we wait for any thing?--why not seize the
pleasure at once?--How often is happiness destroyed by preparation,
foolish preparation!--You told us it would be so.--Oh!  Miss Woodhouse,
"Indeed, I am very sorry to be right in this instance.  I would
"If I can come again, we are still to have our ball.  My father
"Such a fortnight as it has been!" he continued; "every day more
precious and more delightful than the day before!--every day making
me less fit to bear any other place.  Happy those, who can remain
"As you do us such ample justice now," said Emma, laughing, "I will
venture to ask, whether you did not come a little doubtfully at first? 
Do not we rather surpass your expectations?  I am sure we do. 
I am sure you did not much expect to like us.  You would not have been
so long in coming, if you had had a pleasant idea of Highbury."
He laughed rather consciously; and though denying the sentiment,
"Yes; my father is to join me here:  we shall walk back together,
and I must be off immediately.  I am almost afraid that every moment
"Not five minutes to spare even for your friends Miss Fairfax and
Miss Bates?  How unlucky!  Miss Bates's powerful, argumentative mind
"Yes--I have called there; passing the door, I thought it better. 
It was a right thing to do.  I went in for three minutes, and was
detained by Miss Bates's being absent.  She was out; and I felt it
impossible not to wait till she came in.  She is a woman that one may,
that one must laugh at; but that one would not wish to slight. 
"In short," said he, "perhaps, Miss Woodhouse--I think you can
He looked at her, as if wanting to read her thoughts.  She hardly
knew what to say.  It seemed like the forerunner of something
absolutely serious, which she did not wish.  Forcing herself
to speak, therefore, in the hope of putting it by, she calmly said,
"You are quite in the right; it was most natural to pay your visit, then"--
He was silent.  She believed he was looking at her; probably reflecting
on what she had said, and trying to understand the manner. 
She heard him sigh.  It was natural for him to feel that he had
cause to sigh.  He could not believe her to be encouraging him. 
A few awkward moments passed, and he sat down again; and in a more
"It was something to feel that all the rest of my time might be
given to Hartfield.  My regard for Hartfield is most warm"--
He stopt again, rose again, and seemed quite embarrassed.--
He was more in love with her than Emma had supposed; and who can say
how it might have ended, if his father had not made his appearance? 
Mr. Woodhouse soon followed; and the necessity of exertion made
A very few minutes more, however, completed the present trial. 
Mr. Weston, always alert when business was to be done, and as
incapable of procrastinating any evil that was inevitable,
as of foreseeing any that was doubtful, said, "It was time to go;"
and the young man, though he might and did sigh, could not but agree,
"I shall hear about you all," said he; that is my chief consolation. 
I shall hear of every thing that is going on among you.  I have
engaged Mrs. Weston to correspond with me.  She has been so kind as
to promise it.  Oh! the blessing of a female correspondent, when one
is really interested in the absent!--she will tell me every thing. 
In her letters I shall be at dear Highbury again."
A very friendly shake of the hand, a very earnest "Good-bye,"
closed the speech, and the door had soon shut out Frank Churchill. 
Short had been the notice--short their meeting; he was gone; and Emma
felt so sorry to part, and foresaw so great a loss to their little
society from his absence as to begin to be afraid of being too sorry,
It was a sad change.  They had been meeting almost every day
since his arrival.  Certainly his being at Randalls had given
great spirit to the last two weeks--indescribable spirit; the idea,
the expectation of seeing him which every morning had brought,
the assurance of his attentions, his liveliness, his manners! 
It had been a very happy fortnight, and forlorn must be the sinking
from it into the common course of Hartfield days.  To complete every
other recommendation, he had almost told her that he loved her. 
What strength, or what constancy of affection he might be subject to,
was another point; but at present she could not doubt his having
a decidedly warm admiration, a conscious preference of herself;
and this persuasion, joined to all the rest, made her think that
she must be a little in love with him, in spite of every previous
"I certainly must," said she.  "This sensation of listlessness,
weariness, stupidity, this disinclination to sit down and employ myself,
this feeling of every thing's being dull and insipid about the house!--
I must be in love; I should be the oddest creature in the world if I
were not--for a few weeks at least.  Well! evil to some is always
good to others.  I shall have many fellow-mourners for the ball,
if not for Frank Churchill; but Mr. Knightley will be happy. 
He may spend the evening with his dear William Larkins now if he likes."
Mr. Knightley, however, shewed no triumphant happiness.  He could
not say that he was sorry on his own account; his very cheerful look
would have contradicted him if he had; but he said, and very steadily,
that he was sorry for the disappointment of the others, and with
"You, Emma, who have so few opportunities of dancing, you are really
It was some days before she saw Jane Fairfax, to judge of her
honest regret in this woeful change; but when they did meet,
her composure was odious.  She had been particularly unwell, however,
suffering from headache to a degree, which made her aunt declare,
that had the ball taken place, she did not think Jane could have
attended it; and it was charity to impute some of her unbecoming
Emma continued to entertain no doubt of her being in love.  Her ideas
only varied as to the how much.  At first, she thought it was a good deal;
and afterwards, but little.  She had great pleasure in hearing Frank
Churchill talked of; and, for his sake, greater pleasure than ever
in seeing Mr. and Mrs. Weston; she was very often thinking of him,
and quite impatient for a letter, that she might know how he was,
how were his spirits, how was his aunt, and what was the chance
of his coming to Randalls again this spring.  But, on the other hand,
she could not admit herself to be unhappy, nor, after the
first morning, to be less disposed for employment than usual;
she was still busy and cheerful; and, pleasing as he was, she could
yet imagine him to have faults; and farther, though thinking of him
so much, and, as she sat drawing or working, forming a thousand
amusing schemes for the progress and close of their attachment,
fancying interesting dialogues, and inventing elegant letters;
the conclusion of every imaginary declaration on his side was that she
refused him.  Their affection was always to subside into friendship. 
Every thing tender and charming was to mark their parting;
but still they were to part.  When she became sensible of this,
it struck her that she could not be very much in love; for in spite
of her previous and fixed determination never to quit her father,
never to marry, a strong attachment certainly must produce more
of a struggle than she could foresee in her own feelings.
"I do not find myself making any use of the word sacrifice," said she.--
"In not one of all my clever replies, my delicate negatives,
is there any allusion to making a sacrifice.  I do suspect that he
is not really necessary to my happiness.  So much the better. 
I certainly will not persuade myself to feel more than I do.  I am
quite enough in love.  I should be sorry to be more."
Upon the whole, she was equally contented with her view of his feelings.
"He is undoubtedly very much in love--every thing denotes it--very much
in love indeed!--and when he comes again, if his affection continue,
I must be on my guard not to encourage it.--It would be most
inexcusable to do otherwise, as my own mind is quite made up. 
Not that I imagine he can think I have been encouraging him hitherto. 
No, if he had believed me at all to share his feelings, he would
not have been so wretched.  Could he have thought himself encouraged,
his looks and language at parting would have been different.--
Still, however, I must be on my guard.  This is in the supposition
of his attachment continuing what it now is; but I do not know that I
expect it will; I do not look upon him to be quite the sort of man--
I do not altogether build upon his steadiness or constancy.--
His feelings are warm, but I can imagine them rather changeable.--
Every consideration of the subject, in short, makes me thankful
that my happiness is not more deeply involved.--I shall do very well
again after a little while--and then, it will be a good thing over;
for they say every body is in love once in their lives, and I shall
When his letter to Mrs. Weston arrived, Emma had the perusal of it;
and she read it with a degree of pleasure and admiration which made
her at first shake her head over her own sensations, and think she
had undervalued their strength.  It was a long, well-written letter,
giving the particulars of his journey and of his feelings,
expressing all the affection, gratitude, and respect which was
natural and honourable, and describing every thing exterior and local
that could be supposed attractive, with spirit and precision. 
No suspicious flourishes now of apology or concern; it was the
language of real feeling towards Mrs. Weston; and the transition
from Highbury to Enscombe, the contrast between the places in some
of the first blessings of social life was just enough touched on
to shew how keenly it was felt, and how much more might have been
said but for the restraints of propriety.--The charm of her own
name was not wanting.  Miss Woodhouse appeared more than once,
and never without a something of pleasing connexion, either a
compliment to her taste, or a remembrance of what she had said;
and in the very last time of its meeting her eye, unadorned as it
was by any such broad wreath of gallantry, she yet could discern
the effect of her influence and acknowledge the greatest compliment
perhaps of all conveyed.  Compressed into the very lowest vacant
corner were these words--"I had not a spare moment on Tuesday,
as you know, for Miss Woodhouse's beautiful little friend.  Pray make
my excuses and adieus to her."  This, Emma could not doubt, was all
for herself.  Harriet was remembered only from being her friend. 
His information and prospects as to Enscombe were neither worse nor
better than had been anticipated; Mrs. Churchill was recovering,
and he dared not yet, even in his own imagination, fix a time for
Gratifying, however, and stimulative as was the letter in the
material part, its sentiments, she yet found, when it was folded up
and returned to Mrs. Weston, that it had not added any lasting warmth,
that she could still do without the writer, and that he must learn
to do without her.  Her intentions were unchanged.  Her resolution
of refusal only grew more interesting by the addition of a scheme for
his subsequent consolation and happiness.  His recollection of Harriet,
and the words which clothed it, the "beautiful little friend,"
suggested to her the idea of Harriet's succeeding her in his affections. 
Was it impossible?--No.--Harriet undoubtedly was greatly his
inferior in understanding; but he had been very much struck with
the loveliness of her face and the warm simplicity of her manner;
and all the probabilities of circumstance and connexion were in
her favour.--For Harriet, it would be advantageous and delightful indeed.
"I must not dwell upon it," said she.--"I must not think of it. 
I know the danger of indulging such speculations.  But stranger
things have happened; and when we cease to care for each other
as we do now, it will be the means of confirming us in that sort
of true disinterested friendship which I can already look forward
It was well to have a comfort in store on Harriet's behalf,
though it might be wise to let the fancy touch it seldom; for evil
in that quarter was at hand.  As Frank Churchill's arrival had
succeeded Mr. Elton's engagement in the conversation of Highbury,
as the latest interest had entirely borne down the first, so now
upon Frank Churchill's disappearance, Mr. Elton's concerns were
assuming the most irresistible form.--His wedding-day was named. 
He would soon be among them again; Mr. Elton and his bride. 
There was hardly time to talk over the first letter from Enscombe
before "Mr. Elton and his bride" was in every body's mouth,
and Frank Churchill was forgotten.  Emma grew sick at the sound. 
She had had three weeks of happy exemption from Mr. Elton;
and Harriet's mind, she had been willing to hope, had been lately
gaining strength.  With Mr. Weston's ball in view at least,
there had been a great deal of insensibility to other things;
but it was now too evident that she had not attained such a state
of composure as could stand against the actual approach--new carriage,
Poor Harriet was in a flutter of spirits which required all the
reasonings and soothings and attentions of every kind that Emma
could give.  Emma felt that she could not do too much for her,
that Harriet had a right to all her ingenuity and all her patience;
but it was heavy work to be for ever convincing without producing
any effect, for ever agreed to, without being able to make their opinions
the same.  Harriet listened submissively, and said "it was very true--
it was just as Miss Woodhouse described--it was not worth while to
think about them--and she would not think about them any longer"
but no change of subject could avail, and the next half-hour
saw her as anxious and restless about the Eltons as before. 
"Your allowing yourself to be so occupied and so unhappy about
Mr. Elton's marrying, Harriet, is the strongest reproach you can
make me.  You could not give me a greater reproof for the mistake I
fell into.  It was all my doing, I know.  I have not forgotten it,
I assure you.--Deceived myself, I did very miserably deceive you--
and it will be a painful reflection to me for ever.  Do not imagine
Harriet felt this too much to utter more than a few words
"I have not said, exert yourself Harriet for my sake; think less,
talk less of Mr. Elton for my sake; because for your own sake rather,
I would wish it to be done, for the sake of what is more important
than my comfort, a habit of self-command in you, a consideration
of what is your duty, an attention to propriety, an endeavour
to avoid the suspicions of others, to save your health and credit,
and restore your tranquillity.  These are the motives which I
have been pressing on you.  They are very important--and sorry
I am that you cannot feel them sufficiently to act upon them. 
My being saved from pain is a very secondary consideration.  I want
you to save yourself from greater pain.  Perhaps I may sometimes
have felt that Harriet would not forget what was due--or rather
This appeal to her affections did more than all the rest. 
The idea of wanting gratitude and consideration for Miss Woodhouse,
whom she really loved extremely, made her wretched for a while,
and when the violence of grief was comforted away, still remained
powerful enough to prompt to what was right and support her in it
"You, who have been the best friend I ever had in my life--
Want gratitude to you!--Nobody is equal to you!--I care for nobody
as I do for you!--Oh!  Miss Woodhouse, how ungrateful I have been!"
Such expressions, assisted as they were by every thing that look
and manner could do, made Emma feel that she had never loved Harriet
so well, nor valued her affection so highly before.
"There is no charm equal to tenderness of heart," said she
afterwards to herself.  "There is nothing to be compared to it. 
Warmth and tenderness of heart, with an affectionate, open manner,
will beat all the clearness of head in the world, for attraction,
I am sure it will.  It is tenderness of heart which makes my dear
father so generally beloved--which gives Isabella all her popularity.--
I have it not--but I know how to prize and respect it.--Harriet is
my superior in all the charm and all the felicity it gives. 
Dear Harriet!--I would not change you for the clearest-headed,
longest-sighted, best-judging female breathing.  Oh! the coldness
of a Jane Fairfax!--Harriet is worth a hundred such--And for a wife--
a sensible man's wife--it is invaluable.  I mention no names;
Mrs. Elton was first seen at church:  but though devotion might
be interrupted, curiosity could not be satisfied by a bride in a pew,
and it must be left for the visits in form which were then to be paid,
to settle whether she were very pretty indeed, or only rather pretty,
Emma had feelings, less of curiosity than of pride or propriety,
to make her resolve on not being the last to pay her respects;
and she made a point of Harriet's going with her, that the worst of
the business might be gone through as soon as possible.
She could not enter the house again, could not be in the same room
to which she had with such vain artifice retreated three months ago,
to lace up her boot, without recollecting.  A thousand vexatious
thoughts would recur.  Compliments, charades, and horrible blunders;
and it was not to be supposed that poor Harriet should not be
recollecting too; but she behaved very well, and was only rather
pale and silent.  The visit was of course short; and there was so
much embarrassment and occupation of mind to shorten it, that Emma
would not allow herself entirely to form an opinion of the lady,
and on no account to give one, beyond the nothing-meaning terms
She did not really like her.  She would not be in a hurry to find fault,
but she suspected that there was no elegance;--ease, but not elegance.--
She was almost sure that for a young woman, a stranger, a bride,
there was too much ease.  Her person was rather good; her face
not unpretty; but neither feature, nor air, nor voice, nor manner,
were elegant.  Emma thought at least it would turn out so.
As for Mr. Elton, his manners did not appear--but no, she would
not permit a hasty or a witty word from herself about his manners. 
It was an awkward ceremony at any time to be receiving wedding visits,
and a man had need be all grace to acquit himself well through it. 
The woman was better off; she might have the assistance of fine clothes,
and the privilege of bashfulness, but the man had only his own
good sense to depend on; and when she considered how peculiarly
unlucky poor Mr. Elton was in being in the same room at once with
the woman he had just married, the woman he had wanted to marry,
and the woman whom he had been expected to marry, she must allow him
to have the right to look as little wise, and to be as much affectedly,
"Well, Miss Woodhouse," said Harriet, when they had quitted
the house, and after waiting in vain for her friend to begin;
"Well, Miss Woodhouse, (with a gentle sigh,) what do you think of her?--
"Very nicely dressed, indeed; a remarkably elegant gown."
"I am not at all surprized that he should have fallen in love."
"Oh! no--there is nothing to surprize one at all.--A pretty fortune;
"I dare say," returned Harriet, sighing again, "I dare say she
"Perhaps she might; but it is not every man's fate to marry the
woman who loves him best.  Miss Hawkins perhaps wanted a home,
and thought this the best offer she was likely to have."
"Yes," said Harriet earnestly, "and well she might, nobody could ever
have a better.  Well, I wish them happy with all my heart.  And now,
Miss Woodhouse, I do not think I shall mind seeing them again. 
He is just as superior as ever;--but being married, you know,
it is quite a different thing.  No, indeed, Miss Woodhouse, you need
not be afraid; I can sit and admire him now without any great misery. 
To know that he has not thrown himself away, is such a comfort!--
She does seem a charming young woman, just what he deserves. 
Happy creature!  He called her `Augusta.'  How delightful!"
When the visit was returned, Emma made up her mind.  She could then
see more and judge better.  From Harriet's happening not to be
at Hartfield, and her father's being present to engage Mr. Elton,
she had a quarter of an hour of the lady's conversation to herself,
and could composedly attend to her; and the quarter of an hour quite
convinced her that Mrs. Elton was a vain woman, extremely well
satisfied with herself, and thinking much of her own importance;
that she meant to shine and be very superior, but with manners which
had been formed in a bad school, pert and familiar; that all her
notions were drawn from one set of people, and one style of living;
that if not foolish she was ignorant, and that her society would
Harriet would have been a better match.  If not wise or refined herself,
she would have connected him with those who were; but Miss Hawkins,
it might be fairly supposed from her easy conceit, had been the best
of her own set.  The rich brother-in-law near Bristol was the pride
of the alliance, and his place and his carriages were the pride
The very first subject after being seated was Maple Grove, "My brother
Mr. Suckling's seat;"--a comparison of Hartfield to Maple Grove. 
The grounds of Hartfield were small, but neat and pretty; and the
house was modern and well-built. Mrs. Elton seemed most favourably
impressed by the size of the room, the entrance, and all that she
could see or imagine.  "Very like Maple Grove indeed!--She was quite
struck by the likeness!--That room was the very shape and size
of the morning-room at Maple Grove; her sister's favourite room."--
Mr. Elton was appealed to.--"Was not it astonishingly like?--
She could really almost fancy herself at Maple Grove."
"And the staircase--You know, as I came in, I observed how very like
the staircase was; placed exactly in the same part of the house. 
I really could not help exclaiming!  I assure you, Miss Woodhouse,
it is very delightful to me, to be reminded of a place I am so
extremely partial to as Maple Grove.  I have spent so many happy
months there! (with a little sigh of sentiment). A charming place,
undoubtedly.  Every body who sees it is struck by its beauty;
but to me, it has been quite a home.  Whenever you are transplanted,
like me, Miss Woodhouse, you will understand how very delightful it
is to meet with any thing at all like what one has left behind. 
I always say this is quite one of the evils of matrimony."
Emma made as slight a reply as she could; but it was fully sufficient
for Mrs. Elton, who only wanted to be talking herself.
"So extremely like Maple Grove!  And it is not merely the house--
the grounds, I assure you, as far as I could observe, are strikingly
like.  The laurels at Maple Grove are in the same profusion as here,
and stand very much in the same way--just across the lawn;
and I had a glimpse of a fine large tree, with a bench round it,
which put me so exactly in mind!  My brother and sister will be
enchanted with this place.  People who have extensive grounds
themselves are always pleased with any thing in the same style."
Emma doubted the truth of this sentiment.  She had a great idea
that people who had extensive grounds themselves cared very little
for the extensive grounds of any body else; but it was not worth
while to attack an error so double-dyed, and therefore only said
"When you have seen more of this country, I am afraid you will think
you have overrated Hartfield.  Surry is full of beauties."
"Oh! yes, I am quite aware of that.  It is the garden of England,
"Yes; but we must not rest our claims on that distinction. 
Many counties, I believe, are called the garden of England,
"No, I fancy not," replied Mrs. Elton, with a most satisfied smile."
"My brother and sister have promised us a visit in the spring,
or summer at farthest," continued Mrs. Elton; "and that will be
our time for exploring.  While they are with us, we shall explore
a great deal, I dare say.  They will have their barouche-landau,
of course, which holds four perfectly; and therefore, without saying
any thing of our carriage, we should be able to explore the different
beauties extremely well.  They would hardly come in their chaise,
I think, at that season of the year.  Indeed, when the time draws on,
I shall decidedly recommend their bringing the barouche-landau;
it will be so very much preferable.  When people come into a beautiful
country of this sort, you know, Miss Woodhouse, one naturally wishes
them to see as much as possible; and Mr. Suckling is extremely fond
of exploring.  We explored to King's-Weston twice last summer,
in that way, most delightfully, just after their first having the
barouche-landau.  You have many parties of that kind here, I suppose,
"No; not immediately here.  We are rather out of distance of the very
striking beauties which attract the sort of parties you speak of;
and we are a very quiet set of people, I believe; more disposed
to stay at home than engage in schemes of pleasure."
"Ah! there is nothing like staying at home for real comfort. 
Nobody can be more devoted to home than I am.  I was quite
a proverb for it at Maple Grove.  Many a time has Selina said,
when she has been going to Bristol, `I really cannot get this girl
to move from the house.  I absolutely must go in by myself, though I
hate being stuck up in the barouche-landau without a companion;
but Augusta, I believe, with her own good-will, would never stir
beyond the park paling.'  Many a time has she said so; and yet I
am no advocate for entire seclusion.  I think, on the contrary,
when people shut themselves up entirely from society, it is a very
bad thing; and that it is much more advisable to mix in the world in
a proper degree, without living in it either too much or too little. 
I perfectly understand your situation, however, Miss Woodhouse--
(looking towards Mr. Woodhouse), Your father's state of health must
be a great drawback.  Why does not he try Bath?--Indeed he should. 
Let me recommend Bath to you.  I assure you I have no doubt of its doing
"My father tried it more than once, formerly; but without receiving
any benefit; and Mr. Perry, whose name, I dare say, is not unknown
to you, does not conceive it would be at all more likely to be
"Ah! that's a great pity; for I assure you, Miss Woodhouse,
where the waters do agree, it is quite wonderful the relief
they give.  In my Bath life, I have seen such instances of it! 
And it is so cheerful a place, that it could not fail of being of
use to Mr. Woodhouse's spirits, which, I understand, are sometimes
much depressed.  And as to its recommendations to you, I fancy I
need not take much pains to dwell on them.  The advantages of Bath
to the young are pretty generally understood.  It would be a charming
introduction for you, who have lived so secluded a life; and I could
immediately secure you some of the best society in the place. 
A line from me would bring you a little host of acquaintance; and my
particular friend, Mrs. Partridge, the lady I have always resided
with when in Bath, would be most happy to shew you any attentions,
and would be the very person for you to go into public with."
It was as much as Emma could bear, without being impolite. 
The idea of her being indebted to Mrs. Elton for what was called
an introduction--of her going into public under the auspices
of a friend of Mrs. Elton's--probably some vulgar, dashing widow,
who, with the help of a boarder, just made a shift to live!--
The dignity of Miss Woodhouse, of Hartfield, was sunk indeed!
She restrained herself, however, from any of the reproofs she could
have given, and only thanked Mrs. Elton coolly; "but their going
to Bath was quite out of the question; and she was not perfectly
convinced that the place might suit her better than her father." 
And then, to prevent farther outrage and indignation, changed the
"I do not ask whether you are musical, Mrs. Elton.  Upon these occasions,
a lady's character generally precedes her; and Highbury has long
"Oh! no, indeed; I must protest against any such idea. 
A superior performer!--very far from it, I assure you. 
Consider from how partial a quarter your information came. 
I am doatingly fond of music--passionately fond;--and my friends
say I am not entirely devoid of taste; but as to any thing else,
upon my honour my performance is mediocre to the last degree. 
You, Miss Woodhouse, I well know, play delightfully.  I assure you
it has been the greatest satisfaction, comfort, and delight to me,
to hear what a musical society I am got into.  I absolutely cannot
do without music.  It is a necessary of life to me; and having always
been used to a very musical society, both at Maple Grove and in Bath,
it would have been a most serious sacrifice.  I honestly said as much
to Mr. E. when he was speaking of my future home, and expressing
his fears lest the retirement of it should be disagreeable;
and the inferiority of the house too--knowing what I had been
accustomed to--of course he was not wholly without apprehension. 
When he was speaking of it in that way, I honestly said that the
world I could give up--parties, balls, plays--for I had no fear
of retirement.  Blessed with so many resources within myself,
the world was not necessary to me.  I could do very well without it. 
To those who had no resources it was a different thing; but my
resources made me quite independent.  And as to smaller-sized rooms
than I had been used to, I really could not give it a thought. 
I hoped I was perfectly equal to any sacrifice of that description. 
Certainly I had been accustomed to every luxury at Maple Grove; but I
did assure him that two carriages were not necessary to my happiness,
nor were spacious apartments.  `But,' said I, `to be quite honest,
I do not think I can live without something of a musical society. 
I condition for nothing else; but without music, life would be a blank
"We cannot suppose," said Emma, smiling, "that Mr. Elton would hesitate
to assure you of there being a very musical society in Highbury;
and I hope you will not find he has outstepped the truth more than
"No, indeed, I have no doubts at all on that head.  I am delighted
to find myself in such a circle.  I hope we shall have many sweet
little concerts together.  I think, Miss Woodhouse, you and I
must establish a musical club, and have regular weekly meetings
at your house, or ours.  Will not it be a good plan?  If we
exert ourselves, I think we shall not be long in want of allies. 
Something of that nature would be particularly desirable for me,
as an inducement to keep me in practice; for married women, you know--
there is a sad story against them, in general.  They are but too apt
"But you, who are so extremely fond of it--there can
"I should hope not; but really when I look around among my acquaintance,
I tremble.  Selina has entirely given up music--never touches
the instrument--though she played sweetly.  And the same may be said
of Mrs. Jeffereys--Clara Partridge, that was--and of the two Milmans,
now Mrs. Bird and Mrs. James Cooper; and of more than I can enumerate. 
Upon my word it is enough to put one in a fright.  I used to be
quite angry with Selina; but really I begin now to comprehend
that a married woman has many things to call her attention. 
I believe I was half an hour this morning shut up with my housekeeper."
"But every thing of that kind," said Emma, "will soon
"Well," said Mrs. Elton, laughing, "we shall see."
Emma, finding her so determined upon neglecting her music,
had nothing more to say; and, after a moment's pause, Mrs. Elton
"We have been calling at Randalls," said she, "and found them
both at home; and very pleasant people they seem to be. 
I like them extremely.  Mr. Weston seems an excellent creature--
quite a first-rate favourite with me already, I assure you. 
And she appears so truly good--there is something so motherly
and kind-hearted about her, that it wins upon one directly. 
Emma was almost too much astonished to answer; but Mrs. Elton
hardly waited for the affirmative before she went on.
"Having understood as much, I was rather astonished to find her
so very lady-like!  But she is really quite the gentlewoman."
"Mrs. Weston's manners," said Emma, "were always particularly good. 
Their propriety, simplicity, and elegance, would make them the safest
"And who do you think came in while we were there?"
Emma was quite at a loss.  The tone implied some old acquaintance--
"Knightley!" continued Mrs. Elton; "Knightley himself!--Was not
it lucky?--for, not being within when he called the other day,
I had never seen him before; and of course, as so particular a
friend of Mr. E.'s, I had a great curiosity.  `My friend Knightley'
had been so often mentioned, that I was really impatient to see him;
and I must do my caro sposo the justice to say that he need not
be ashamed of his friend.  Knightley is quite the gentleman. 
I like him very much.  Decidedly, I think, a very gentleman-like man."
Happily, it was now time to be gone.  They were off; and Emma
"Insufferable woman!" was her immediate exclamation.  "Worse than I
had supposed.  Absolutely insufferable!  Knightley!--I could not
have believed it.  Knightley!--never seen him in her life before,
and call him Knightley!--and discover that he is a gentleman! 
A little upstart, vulgar being, with her Mr. E., and her caro sposo,
and her resources, and all her airs of pert pretension and
underbred finery.  Actually to discover that Mr. Knightley is
a gentleman!  I doubt whether he will return the compliment,
and discover her to be a lady.  I could not have believed it! 
And to propose that she and I should unite to form a musical club! 
One would fancy we were bosom friends!  And Mrs. Weston!--
Astonished that the person who had brought me up should be
a gentlewoman!  Worse and worse.  I never met with her equal. 
Much beyond my hopes.  Harriet is disgraced by any comparison. 
Oh! what would Frank Churchill say to her, if he were here? 
How angry and how diverted he would be!  Ah! there I am--
thinking of him directly.  Always the first person to be thought of! 
How I catch myself out!  Frank Churchill comes as regularly into
All this ran so glibly through her thoughts, that by the time
her father had arranged himself, after the bustle of the Eltons'
departure, and was ready to speak, she was very tolerably capable
"Well, my dear," he deliberately began, "considering we never saw
her before, she seems a very pretty sort of young lady; and I dare say
she was very much pleased with you.  She speaks a little too quick. 
A little quickness of voice there is which rather hurts the ear. 
But I believe I am nice; I do not like strange voices; and nobody speaks
like you and poor Miss Taylor.  However, she seems a very obliging,
pretty-behaved young lady, and no doubt will make him a very good wife. 
Though I think he had better not have married.  I made the best
excuses I could for not having been able to wait on him and Mrs. Elton
on this happy occasion; I said that I hoped I should in the course
of the summer.  But I ought to have gone before.  Not to wait upon
a bride is very remiss.  Ah! it shews what a sad invalid I am! 
"I dare say your apologies were accepted, sir.  Mr. Elton knows you."
"Yes:  but a young lady--a bride--I ought to have paid my respects
to her if possible.  It was being very deficient."
"But, my dear papa, you are no friend to matrimony; and therefore
why should you be so anxious to pay your respects to a bride? 
It ought to be no recommendation to you.  It is encouraging people
"No, my dear, I never encouraged any body to marry, but I would
always wish to pay every proper attention to a lady--and a bride,
especially, is never to be neglected.  More is avowedly due to her. 
A bride, you know, my dear, is always the first in company,
"Well, papa, if this is not encouragement to marry, I do not know
what is.  And I should never have expected you to be lending your
sanction to such vanity-baits for poor young ladies."
matter of mere common politeness and good-breeding,
and has nothing to do with any encouragement to people to marry."
Emma had done.  Her father was growing nervous, and could not
understand her.  Her mind returned to Mrs. Elton's offences,
Emma was not required, by any subsequent discovery, to retract her ill
opinion of Mrs. Elton.  Her observation had been pretty correct. 
Such as Mrs. Elton appeared to her on this second interview,
such she appeared whenever they met again,--self-important, presuming,
familiar, ignorant, and ill-bred. She had a little beauty and a
little accomplishment, but so little judgment that she thought herself
coming with superior knowledge of the world, to enliven and improve
a country neighbourhood; and conceived Miss Hawkins to have held
such a place in society as Mrs. Elton's consequence only could surpass.
There was no reason to suppose Mr. Elton thought at all differently
from his wife.  He seemed not merely happy with her, but proud. 
He had the air of congratulating himself on having brought such
a woman to Highbury, as not even Miss Woodhouse could equal;
and the greater part of her new acquaintance, disposed to commend,
or not in the habit of judging, following the lead of Miss Bates's
good-will, or taking it for granted that the bride must be as clever
and as agreeable as she professed herself, were very well satisfied;
so that Mrs. Elton's praise passed from one mouth to another as it
ought to do, unimpeded by Miss Woodhouse, who readily continued her
first contribution and talked with a good grace of her being "very
In one respect Mrs. Elton grew even worse than she had appeared
at first.  Her feelings altered towards Emma.--Offended, probably,
by the little encouragement which her proposals of intimacy met with,
she drew back in her turn and gradually became much more cold
and distant; and though the effect was agreeable, the ill-will
which produced it was necessarily increasing Emma's dislike. 
Her manners, too--and Mr. Elton's, were unpleasant towards Harriet. 
They were sneering and negligent.  Emma hoped it must rapidly work
Harriet's cure; but the sensations which could prompt such behaviour
sunk them both very much.--It was not to be doubted that poor
Harriet's attachment had been an offering to conjugal unreserve,
and her own share in the story, under a colouring the least favourable
to her and the most soothing to him, had in all likelihood been
given also.  She was, of course, the object of their joint dislike.--
When they had nothing else to say, it must be always easy to begin
abusing Miss Woodhouse; and the enmity which they dared not shew
in open disrespect to her, found a broader vent in contemptuous
Mrs. Elton took a great fancy to Jane Fairfax; and from the first. 
Not merely when a state of warfare with one young lady might be
supposed to recommend the other, but from the very first; and she
was not satisfied with expressing a natural and reasonable admiration--
but without solicitation, or plea, or privilege, she must be wanting
to assist and befriend her.--Before Emma had forfeited her confidence,
and about the third time of their meeting, she heard all Mrs. Elton's
"Jane Fairfax is absolutely charming, Miss Woodhouse.--I quite
rave about Jane Fairfax.--A sweet, interesting creature.  So mild
and ladylike--and with such talents!--I assure you I think she
has very extraordinary talents.  I do not scruple to say that she
plays extremely well.  I know enough of music to speak decidedly
on that point.  Oh! she is absolutely charming!  You will laugh at
my warmth--but, upon my word, I talk of nothing but Jane Fairfax.--
And her situation is so calculated to affect one!--Miss Woodhouse,
we must exert ourselves and endeavour to do something for her. 
We must bring her forward.  Such talent as hers must not be suffered
to remain unknown.--I dare say you have heard those charming lines of
        `Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
          `And waste its fragrance on the desert air.'
We must not allow them to be verified in sweet Jane Fairfax."
"I cannot think there is any danger of it," was Emma's calm answer--
"and when you are better acquainted with Miss Fairfax's situation
and understand what her home has been, with Colonel and Mrs. Campbell,
I have no idea that you will suppose her talents can be unknown."
"Oh! but dear Miss Woodhouse, she is now in such retirement,
such obscurity, so thrown away.--Whatever advantages she may have
enjoyed with the Campbells are so palpably at an end!  And I think
she feels it.  I am sure she does.  She is very timid and silent. 
One can see that she feels the want of encouragement.  I like her
the better for it.  I must confess it is a recommendation to me. 
I am a great advocate for timidity--and I am sure one does
not often meet with it.--But in those who are at all inferior,
it is extremely prepossessing.  Oh!  I assure you, Jane Fairfax
is a very delightful character, and interests me more than I
"You appear to feel a great deal--but I am not aware how you or any
of Miss Fairfax's acquaintance here, any of those who have known
her longer than yourself, can shew her any other attention than"--
"My dear Miss Woodhouse, a vast deal may be done by those who dare
to act.  You and I need not be afraid.  If we set the example,
many will follow it as far as they can; though all have not
our situations.  We have carriages to fetch and convey her home,
and we live in a style which could not make the addition of
Jane Fairfax, at any time, the least inconvenient.--I should be
extremely displeased if Wright were to send us up such a dinner,
as could make me regret having asked more than Jane Fairfax
to partake of it.  I have no idea of that sort of thing.  It is
not likely that I should, considering what I have been used to. 
My greatest danger, perhaps, in housekeeping, may be quite the
other way, in doing too much, and being too careless of expense. 
Maple Grove will probably be my model more than it ought to be--
for we do not at all affect to equal my brother, Mr. Suckling,
in income.--However, my resolution is taken as to noticing Jane Fairfax.--
I shall certainly have her very often at my house, shall introduce
her wherever I can, shall have musical parties to draw out her talents,
and shall be constantly on the watch for an eligible situation. 
My acquaintance is so very extensive, that I have little doubt
of hearing of something to suit her shortly.--I shall introduce her,
of course, very particularly to my brother and sister when they come
to us.  I am sure they will like her extremely; and when she gets
a little acquainted with them, her fears will completely wear off,
for there really is nothing in the manners of either but what is
highly conciliating.--I shall have her very often indeed while they
are with me, and I dare say we shall sometimes find a seat for her in
the barouche-landau in some of our exploring parties."
"Poor Jane Fairfax!"--thought Emma.--"You have not deserved this. 
You may have done wrong with regard to Mr. Dixon, but this is a
punishment beyond what you can have merited!--The kindness and protection
of Mrs. Elton!--`Jane Fairfax and Jane Fairfax.'  Heavens!  Let me
not suppose that she dares go about, Emma Woodhouse-ing me!--
But upon my honour, there seems no limits to the licentiousness
Emma had not to listen to such paradings again--to any so exclusively
addressed to herself--so disgustingly decorated with a "dear Miss
Woodhouse."  The change on Mrs. Elton's side soon afterwards appeared,
and she was left in peace--neither forced to be the very particular
friend of Mrs. Elton, nor, under Mrs. Elton's guidance, the very
active patroness of Jane Fairfax, and only sharing with others in a
general way, in knowing what was felt, what was meditated, what was done.
She looked on with some amusement.--Miss Bates's gratitude for
Mrs. Elton's attentions to Jane was in the first style of guileless
simplicity and warmth.  She was quite one of her worthies--
the most amiable, affable, delightful woman--just as accomplished
and condescending as Mrs. Elton meant to be considered. 
Emma's only surprize was that Jane Fairfax should accept
those attentions and tolerate Mrs. Elton as she seemed to do. 
She heard of her walking with the Eltons, sitting with the Eltons,
spending a day with the Eltons!  This was astonishing!--She could not
have believed it possible that the taste or the pride of Miss Fairfax
could endure such society and friendship as the Vicarage had to offer.
"She is a riddle, quite a riddle!" said she.--"To chuse to remain
here month after month, under privations of every sort!  And now
to chuse the mortification of Mrs. Elton's notice and the penury
of her conversation, rather than return to the superior companions
who have always loved her with such real, generous affection."
Jane had come to Highbury professedly for three months; the Campbells
were gone to Ireland for three months; but now the Campbells
had promised their daughter to stay at least till Midsummer,
and fresh invitations had arrived for her to join them there. 
According to Miss Bates--it all came from her--Mrs. Dixon had
written most pressingly.  Would Jane but go, means were to be found,
servants sent, friends contrived--no travelling difficulty allowed
"She must have some motive, more powerful than appears, for refusing
this invitation," was Emma's conclusion.  "She must be under some
sort of penance, inflicted either by the Campbells or herself. 
There is great fear, great caution, great resolution somewhere.--
She is not to be with the Dixons.  The decree is issued by somebody. 
But why must she consent to be with the Eltons?--Here is quite a
Upon her speaking her wonder aloud on that part of the subject,
before the few who knew her opinion of Mrs. Elton, Mrs. Weston
"We cannot suppose that she has any great enjoyment at the Vicarage,
my dear Emma--but it is better than being always at home. 
Her aunt is a good creature, but, as a constant companion,
must be very tiresome.  We must consider what Miss Fairfax quits,
before we condemn her taste for what she goes to."
"You are right, Mrs. Weston," said Mr. Knightley warmly, "Miss Fairfax
is as capable as any of us of forming a just opinion of Mrs. Elton. 
Could she have chosen with whom to associate, she would not have
chosen her.  But (with a reproachful smile at Emma) she receives
attentions from Mrs. Elton, which nobody else pays her."
Emma felt that Mrs. Weston was giving her a momentary glance;
and she was herself struck by his warmth.  With a faint blush,
"Such attentions as Mrs. Elton's, I should have imagined,
would rather disgust than gratify Miss Fairfax.  Mrs. Elton's
invitations I should have imagined any thing but inviting."
"I should not wonder," said Mrs. Weston, "if Miss Fairfax were to have
been drawn on beyond her own inclination, by her aunt's eagerness
in accepting Mrs. Elton's civilities for her.  Poor Miss Bates may
very likely have committed her niece and hurried her into a greater
appearance of intimacy than her own good sense would have dictated,
in spite of the very natural wish of a little change."
Both felt rather anxious to hear him speak again; and after a few
"Another thing must be taken into consideration too--Mrs. Elton
does not talk to Miss Fairfax as she speaks of her.  We all know
the difference between the pronouns he or she and thou, the plainest
spoken amongst us; we all feel the influence of a something beyond
common civility in our personal intercourse with each other--
a something more early implanted.  We cannot give any body the
disagreeable hints that we may have been very full of the hour before. 
We feel things differently.  And besides the operation of this,
as a general principle, you may be sure that Miss Fairfax awes
Mrs. Elton by her superiority both of mind and manner; and that,
face to face, Mrs. Elton treats her with all the respect which she
has a claim to.  Such a woman as Jane Fairfax probably never fell
in Mrs. Elton's way before--and no degree of vanity can prevent
her acknowledging her own comparative littleness in action, if not
"I know how highly you think of Jane Fairfax," said Emma. 
Little Henry was in her thoughts, and a mixture of alarm and delicacy
"Yes," he replied, "any body may know how highly I think of her."
"And yet," said Emma, beginning hastily and with an arch look,
but soon stopping--it was better, however, to know the worst at once--
she hurried on--"And yet, perhaps, you may hardly be aware yourself
how highly it is.  The extent of your admiration may take you by
Mr. Knightley was hard at work upon the lower buttons of his thick
leather gaiters, and either the exertion of getting them together,
or some other cause, brought the colour into his face, as he answered,
"Oh! are you there?--But you are miserably behindhand.  Mr. Cole
He stopped.--Emma felt her foot pressed by Mrs. Weston, and did
not herself know what to think.  In a moment he went on--
"That will never be, however, I can assure you.  Miss Fairfax,
I dare say, would not have me if I were to ask her--and I am very
Emma returned her friend's pressure with interest; and was pleased
"You are not vain, Mr. Knightley.  I will say that for you."
He seemed hardly to hear her; he was thoughtful--and in a manner
which shewed him not pleased, soon afterwards said,
"So you have been settling that I should marry Jane Fairfax?"
"No indeed I have not.  You have scolded me too much for match-making,
for me to presume to take such a liberty with you.  What I said
just now, meant nothing.  One says those sort of things, of course,
without any idea of a serious meaning.  Oh! no, upon my word I have not
the smallest wish for your marrying Jane Fairfax or Jane any body. 
You would not come in and sit with us in this comfortable way,
Mr. Knightley was thoughtful again.  The result of his reverie was,
"No, Emma, I do not think the extent of my admiration for her will
ever take me by surprize.--I never had a thought of her in that way,
I assure you."  And soon afterwards, "Jane Fairfax is a very charming
young woman--but not even Jane Fairfax is perfect.  She has a fault. 
She has not the open temper which a man would wish for in a wife."
Emma could not but rejoice to hear that she had a fault. 
"Well," said she, "and you soon silenced Mr. Cole, I suppose?"
"Yes, very soon.  He gave me a quiet hint; I told him he was mistaken;
he asked my pardon and said no more.  Cole does not want to be wiser
"In that respect how unlike dear Mrs. Elton, who wants to be wiser
and wittier than all the world!  I wonder how she speaks of the Coles--
what she calls them!  How can she find any appellation for them,
deep enough in familiar vulgarity?  She calls you, Knightley--what can
she do for Mr. Cole?  And so I am not to be surprized that Jane
Fairfax accepts her civilities and consents to be with her. 
Mrs. Weston, your argument weighs most with me.  I can much more
readily enter into the temptation of getting away from Miss Bates,
than I can believe in the triumph of Miss Fairfax's mind over
Mrs. Elton.  I have no faith in Mrs. Elton's acknowledging herself
the inferior in thought, word, or deed; or in her being under any
restraint beyond her own scanty rule of good-breeding. I cannot
imagine that she will not be continually insulting her visitor
with praise, encouragement, and offers of service; that she will not be
continually detailing her magnificent intentions, from the procuring
her a permanent situation to the including her in those delightful
exploring parties which are to take place in the barouche-landau."
"Jane Fairfax has feeling," said Mr. Knightley--"I do not
accuse her of want of feeling.  Her sensibilities, I suspect,
are strong--and her temper excellent in its power of forbearance,
patience, self-controul; but it wants openness.  She is reserved,
more reserved, I think, than she used to be--And I love an
open temper.  No--till Cole alluded to my supposed attachment,
it had never entered my head.  I saw Jane Fairfax and conversed with
her, with admiration and pleasure always--but with no thought beyond."
"Well, Mrs. Weston," said Emma triumphantly when he left them,
"what do you say now to Mr. Knightley's marrying Jane Fairfax?"
"Why, really, dear Emma, I say that he is so very much occupied
by the idea of not being in love with her, that I should not wonder
if it were to end in his being so at last.  Do not beat me."
Every body in and about Highbury who had ever visited Mr. Elton,
was disposed to pay him attention on his marriage.  Dinner-parties and
evening-parties were made for him and his lady; and invitations
flowed in so fast that she had soon the pleasure of apprehending
"I see how it is," said she.  "I see what a life I am to lead
among you.  Upon my word we shall be absolutely dissipated. 
We really seem quite the fashion.  If this is living in the country,
it is nothing very formidable.  From Monday next to Saturday,
I assure you we have not a disengaged day!--A woman with fewer
resources than I have, need not have been at a loss."
No invitation came amiss to her.  Her Bath habits made evening-parties
perfectly natural to her, and Maple Grove had given her a taste
for dinners.  She was a little shocked at the want of two
drawing rooms, at the poor attempt at rout-cakes, and there being
no ice in the Highbury card-parties. Mrs. Bates, Mrs. Perry,
Mrs. Goddard and others, were a good deal behind-hand in knowledge
of the world, but she would soon shew them how every thing ought
to be arranged.  In the course of the spring she must return their
civilities by one very superior party--in which her card-tables
should be set out with their separate candles and unbroken packs
in the true style--and more waiters engaged for the evening
than their own establishment could furnish, to carry round
the refreshments at exactly the proper hour, and in the proper order.
Emma, in the meanwhile, could not be satisfied without a dinner
at Hartfield for the Eltons.  They must not do less than others,
or she should be exposed to odious suspicions, and imagined capable
of pitiful resentment.  A dinner there must be.  After Emma had
talked about it for ten minutes, Mr. Woodhouse felt no unwillingness,
and only made the usual stipulation of not sitting at the bottom
of the table himself, with the usual regular difficulty of deciding
The persons to be invited, required little thought.  Besides the Eltons,
it must be the Westons and Mr. Knightley; so far it was all of course--
and it was hardly less inevitable that poor little Harriet must
be asked to make the eighth:--but this invitation was not given
with equal satisfaction, and on many accounts Emma was particularly
pleased by Harriet's begging to be allowed to decline it. 
"She would rather not be in his company more than she could help. 
She was not yet quite able to see him and his charming happy
wife together, without feeling uncomfortable.  If Miss Woodhouse
would not be displeased, she would rather stay at home." 
It was precisely what Emma would have wished, had she deemed it
possible enough for wishing.  She was delighted with the fortitude
of her little friend--for fortitude she knew it was in her to give
up being in company and stay at home; and she could now invite the
very person whom she really wanted to make the eighth, Jane Fairfax.--
Since her last conversation with Mrs. Weston and Mr. Knightley,
she was more conscience-stricken about Jane Fairfax than she had
often been.--Mr. Knightley's words dwelt with her.  He had said
that Jane Fairfax received attentions from Mrs. Elton which nobody
"This is very true," said she, "at least as far as relates to me,
which was all that was meant--and it is very shameful.--Of the same age--
and always knowing her--I ought to have been more her friend.--
She will never like me now.  I have neglected her too long.  But I
will shew her greater attention than I have done."
Every invitation was successful.  They were all disengaged and all happy.--
The preparatory interest of this dinner, however, was not yet over. 
A circumstance rather unlucky occurred.  The two eldest little
Knightleys were engaged to pay their grandpapa and aunt a visit of
some weeks in the spring, and their papa now proposed bringing them,
and staying one whole day at Hartfield--which one day would be
the very day of this party.--His professional engagements did
not allow of his being put off, but both father and daughter were
disturbed by its happening so.  Mr. Woodhouse considered eight
persons at dinner together as the utmost that his nerves could bear--
and here would be a ninth--and Emma apprehended that it would
be a ninth very much out of humour at not being able to come even
to Hartfield for forty-eight hours without falling in with a dinner-party.
She comforted her father better than she could comfort herself,
by representing that though he certainly would make them nine,
yet he always said so little, that the increase of noise would be
very immaterial.  She thought it in reality a sad exchange for herself,
to have him with his grave looks and reluctant conversation opposed
The event was more favourable to Mr. Woodhouse than to Emma. 
John Knightley came; but Mr. Weston was unexpectedly summoned to town
and must be absent on the very day.  He might be able to join them
in the evening, but certainly not to dinner.  Mr. Woodhouse was quite
at ease; and the seeing him so, with the arrival of the little boys
and the philosophic composure of her brother on hearing his fate,
The day came, the party were punctually assembled, and Mr. John Knightley
seemed early to devote himself to the business of being agreeable. 
Instead of drawing his brother off to a window while they waited
for dinner, he was talking to Miss Fairfax.  Mrs. Elton, as elegant
as lace and pearls could make her, he looked at in silence--
wanting only to observe enough for Isabella's information--but Miss
Fairfax was an old acquaintance and a quiet girl, and he could
talk to her.  He had met her before breakfast as he was returning
from a walk with his little boys, when it had been just beginning
to rain.  It was natural to have some civil hopes on the subject,
"I hope you did not venture far, Miss Fairfax, this morning, or I
am sure you must have been wet.--We scarcely got home in time. 
"I went only to the post-office," said she, "and reached home
before the rain was much.  It is my daily errand.  I always fetch
the letters when I am here.  It saves trouble, and is a something
to get me out.  A walk before breakfast does me good."
"No, but it did not absolutely rain when I set out."
"That is to say, you chose to have your walk, for you were not six
yards from your own door when I had the pleasure of meeting you;
and Henry and John had seen more drops than they could count long before. 
The post-office has a great charm at one period of our lives. 
When you have lived to my age, you will begin to think letters are
"I must not hope to be ever situated as you are, in the midst of
every dearest connexion, and therefore I cannot expect that simply
growing older should make me indifferent about letters."
"Indifferent!  Oh! no--I never conceived you could become indifferent. 
Letters are no matter of indifference; they are generally a very
"You are speaking of letters of business; mine are letters
"I have often thought them the worst of the two," replied he coolly. 
"Business, you know, may bring money, but friendship hardly
"Ah! you are not serious now.  I know Mr. John Knightley too well--
I am very sure he understands the value of friendship as well as
any body.  I can easily believe that letters are very little to you,
much less than to me, but it is not your being ten years older than
myself which makes the difference, it is not age, but situation. 
You have every body dearest to you always at hand, I, probably,
never shall again; and therefore till I have outlived all my affections,
a post-office, I think, must always have power to draw me out,
"When I talked of your being altered by time, by the progress of years,"
said John Knightley, "I meant to imply the change of situation
which time usually brings.  I consider one as including the other. 
Time will generally lessen the interest of every attachment not within
the daily circle--but that is not the change I had in view for you. 
As an old friend, you will allow me to hope, Miss Fairfax, that ten
years hence you may have as many concentrated objects as I have."
It was kindly said, and very far from giving offence.  A pleasant
"thank you" seemed meant to laugh it off, but a blush, a quivering lip,
a tear in the eye, shewed that it was felt beyond a laugh. 
Her attention was now claimed by Mr. Woodhouse, who being,
according to his custom on such occasions, making the circle of
his guests, and paying his particular compliments to the ladies,
was ending with her--and with all his mildest urbanity, said,
"I am very sorry to hear, Miss Fairfax, of your being out this
morning in the rain.  Young ladies should take care of themselves.--
Young ladies are delicate plants.  They should take care of their
health and their complexion.  My dear, did you change your stockings?"
"Yes, sir, I did indeed; and I am very much obliged by your kind
"My dear Miss Fairfax, young ladies are very sure to be cared for.--
I hope your good grand-mama and aunt are well.  They are some
of my very old friends.  I wish my health allowed me to be a
better neighbour.  You do us a great deal of honour to-day, I am sure. 
My daughter and I are both highly sensible of your goodness,
and have the greatest satisfaction in seeing you at Hartfield."
The kind-hearted, polite old man might then sit down and feel
that he had done his duty, and made every fair lady welcome and easy.
By this time, the walk in the rain had reached Mrs. Elton,
"My dear Jane, what is this I hear?--Going to the post-office
in the rain!--This must not be, I assure you.--You sad girl,
how could you do such a thing?--It is a sign I was not there
Jane very patiently assured her that she had not caught any cold.
"Oh! do not tell me.  You really are a very sad girl, and do not
know how to take care of yourself.--To the post-office indeed! 
Mrs. Weston, did you ever hear the like?  You and I must positively
"My advice," said Mrs. Weston kindly and persuasively, "I certainly
do feel tempted to give.  Miss Fairfax, you must not run such risks.--
Liable as you have been to severe colds, indeed you ought
to be particularly careful, especially at this time of year. 
The spring I always think requires more than common care. 
Better wait an hour or two, or even half a day for your letters,
than run the risk of bringing on your cough again.  Now do not you
feel that you had?  Yes, I am sure you are much too reasonable. 
You look as if you would not do such a thing again."
"Oh! she shall not do such a thing again," eagerly rejoined
Mrs. Elton.  "We will not allow her to do such a thing again:"--
and nodding significantly--"there must be some arrangement made,
there must indeed.  I shall speak to Mr. E. The man who fetches
our letters every morning (one of our men, I forget his name)
shall inquire for yours too and bring them to you.  That will obviate
all difficulties you know; and from us I really think, my dear Jane,
you can have no scruple to accept such an accommodation."
"You are extremely kind," said Jane; "but I cannot give up my
early walk.  I am advised to be out of doors as much as I can,
I must walk somewhere, and the post-office is an object; and upon
my word, I have scarcely ever had a bad morning before."
"My dear Jane, say no more about it.  The thing is determined,
that is (laughing affectedly) as far as I can presume to determine
any thing without the concurrence of my lord and master.  You know,
Mrs. Weston, you and I must be cautious how we express ourselves. 
But I do flatter myself, my dear Jane, that my influence is not entirely
worn out.  If I meet with no insuperable difficulties therefore,
"Excuse me," said Jane earnestly, "I cannot by any means consent
to such an arrangement, so needlessly troublesome to your servant. 
If the errand were not a pleasure to me, it could be done, as it
"Oh! my dear; but so much as Patty has to do!--And it is a kindness
Jane looked as if she did not mean to be conquered; but instead
of answering, she began speaking again to Mr. John Knightley.
"The post-office is a wonderful establishment!" said she.--
"The regularity and despatch of it!  If one thinks of all that it
has to do, and all that it does so well, it is really astonishing!"
"So seldom that any negligence or blunder appears!  So seldom
that a letter, among the thousands that are constantly passing
about the kingdom, is even carried wrong--and not one in a million,
I suppose, actually lost!  And when one considers the variety
of hands, and of bad hands too, that are to be deciphered,
"The clerks grow expert from habit.--They must begin with some
quickness of sight and hand, and exercise improves them.  If you
want any farther explanation," continued he, smiling, "they are
paid for it.  That is the key to a great deal of capacity. 
The varieties of handwriting were farther talked of, and the usual
"I have heard it asserted," said John Knightley, "that the same
sort of handwriting often prevails in a family; and where the
same master teaches, it is natural enough.  But for that reason,
I should imagine the likeness must be chiefly confined to the females,
for boys have very little teaching after an early age, and scramble
into any hand they can get.  Isabella and Emma, I think, do write
very much alike.  I have not always known their writing apart."
"Yes," said his brother hesitatingly, "there is a likeness. 
I know what you mean--but Emma's hand is the strongest."
"Isabella and Emma both write beautifully," said Mr. Woodhouse;
"and always did.  And so does poor Mrs. Weston"--with half a sigh
"I never saw any gentleman's handwriting"--Emma began, looking also
at Mrs. Weston; but stopped, on perceiving that Mrs. Weston was
attending to some one else--and the pause gave her time to reflect,
"Now, how am I going to introduce him?--Am I unequal to speaking
his name at once before all these people?  Is it necessary
for me to use any roundabout phrase?--Your Yorkshire friend--
your correspondent in Yorkshire;--that would be the way, I suppose,
if I were very bad.--No, I can pronounce his name without the
smallest distress.  I certainly get better and better.--Now for it."
Mrs. Weston was disengaged and Emma began again--"Mr. Frank Churchill
writes one of the best gentleman's hands I ever saw."
"I do not admire it," said Mr. Knightley.  "It is too small--
This was not submitted to by either lady.  They vindicated him
against the base aspersion.  "No, it by no means wanted strength--
it was not a large hand, but very clear and certainly strong. 
Had not Mrs. Weston any letter about her to produce?"  No, she had
heard from him very lately, but having answered the letter, had put
"If we were in the other room," said Emma, "if I had my writing-desk,
I am sure I could produce a specimen.  I have a note of his.--
Do not you remember, Mrs. Weston, employing him to write for you
"Well, well, I have that note; and can shew it after dinner
"Oh! when a gallant young man, like Mr. Frank Churchill,"
said Mr. Knightley dryly, "writes to a fair lady like Miss Woodhouse,
Dinner was on table.--Mrs. Elton, before she could be spoken to,
was ready; and before Mr. Woodhouse had reached her with his request
to be allowed to hand her into the dining-parlour, was saying--
"Must I go first?  I really am ashamed of always leading the way."
Jane's solicitude about fetching her own letters had not escaped Emma. 
She had heard and seen it all; and felt some curiosity to know
whether the wet walk of this morning had produced any.  She suspected
that it had; that it would not have been so resolutely encountered
but in full expectation of hearing from some one very dear,
and that it had not been in vain.  She thought there was an air
of greater happiness than usual--a glow both of complexion and spirits.
She could have made an inquiry or two, as to the expedition
and the expense of the Irish mails;--it was at her tongue's end--
but she abstained.  She was quite determined not to utter a word
that should hurt Jane Fairfax's feelings; and they followed
the other ladies out of the room, arm in arm, with an appearance
of good-will highly becoming to the beauty and grace of each.
When the ladies returned to the drawing-room after dinner, Emma found
it hardly possible to prevent their making two distinct parties;--
with so much perseverance in judging and behaving ill did Mrs. Elton
engross Jane Fairfax and slight herself.  She and Mrs. Weston were
obliged to be almost always either talking together or silent together. 
Mrs. Elton left them no choice.  If Jane repressed her for a
little time, she soon began again; and though much that passed
between them was in a half-whisper, especially on Mrs. Elton's side,
there was no avoiding a knowledge of their principal subjects: 
The post-office--catching cold--fetching letters--and friendship,
were long under discussion; and to them succeeded one, which must
be at least equally unpleasant to Jane--inquiries whether she had
yet heard of any situation likely to suit her, and professions of
"Here is April come!" said she, "I get quite anxious about you. 
"But I have never fixed on June or any other month--merely looked
"I have not even made any inquiry; I do not wish to make any yet."
"Oh! my dear, we cannot begin too early; you are not aware
of the difficulty of procuring exactly the desirable thing."
"I not aware!" said Jane, shaking her head; "dear Mrs. Elton,
"But you have not seen so much of the world as I have.  You do not
know how many candidates there always are for the first situations. 
I saw a vast deal of that in the neighbourhood round Maple Grove. 
A cousin of Mr. Suckling, Mrs. Bragge, had such an infinity
of applications; every body was anxious to be in her family,
for she moves in the first circle.  Wax-candles in the schoolroom! 
You may imagine how desirable!  Of all houses in the kingdom
Mrs. Bragge's is the one I would most wish to see you in."
"Colonel and Mrs. Campbell are to be in town again by midsummer,"
said Jane.  "I must spend some time with them; I am sure they will
want it;--afterwards I may probably be glad to dispose of myself. 
But I would not wish you to take the trouble of making any inquiries
"Trouble! aye, I know your scruples.  You are afraid of giving
me trouble; but I assure you, my dear Jane, the Campbells can
hardly be more interested about you than I am.  I shall write
to Mrs. Partridge in a day or two, and shall give her a strict
charge to be on the look-out for any thing eligible."
"Thank you, but I would rather you did not mention the subject
to her; till the time draws nearer, I do not wish to be giving
"But, my dear child, the time is drawing near; here is April,
and June, or say even July, is very near, with such business
to accomplish before us.  Your inexperience really amuses me! 
A situation such as you deserve, and your friends would require for you,
is no everyday occurrence, is not obtained at a moment's notice;
indeed, indeed, we must begin inquiring directly."
"Excuse me, ma'am, but this is by no means my intention; I make no
inquiry myself, and should be sorry to have any made by my friends. 
When I am quite determined as to the time, I am not at all afraid
of being long unemployed.  There are places in town, offices,
where inquiry would soon produce something--Offices for the sale--
not quite of human flesh--but of human intellect."
"Oh! my dear, human flesh!  You quite shock me; if you mean a fling
at the slave-trade, I assure you Mr. Suckling was always rather
"I did not mean, I was not thinking of the slave-trade," replied Jane;
"governess-trade, I assure you, was all that I had in view;
widely different certainly as to the guilt of those who carry it on;
but as to the greater misery of the victims, I do not know where
it lies.  But I only mean to say that there are advertising offices,
and that by applying to them I should have no doubt of very soon
"Something that would do!" repeated Mrs. Elton.  "Aye, that may
suit your humble ideas of yourself;--I know what a modest creature
you are; but it will not satisfy your friends to have you taking up
with any thing that may offer, any inferior, commonplace situation,
in a family not moving in a certain circle, or able to command
"You are very obliging; but as to all that, I am very indifferent;
it would be no object to me to be with the rich; my mortifications,
I think, would only be the greater; I should suffer more from comparison. 
A gentleman's family is all that I should condition for."
"I know you, I know you; you would take up with any thing; but I
shall be a little more nice, and I am sure the good Campbells will
be quite on my side; with your superior talents, you have a right
to move in the first circle.  Your musical knowledge alone would
entitle you to name your own terms, have as many rooms as you like,
and mix in the family as much as you chose;--that is--I do not know--
if you knew the harp, you might do all that, I am very sure;
but you sing as well as play;--yes, I really believe you might,
even without the harp, stipulate for what you chose;--and you must
and shall be delightfully, honourably and comfortably settled before
"You may well class the delight, the honour, and the comfort
of such a situation together," said Jane, "they are pretty sure
to be equal; however, I am very serious in not wishing any thing
to be attempted at present for me.  I am exceedingly obliged to you,
Mrs. Elton, I am obliged to any body who feels for me, but I am
quite serious in wishing nothing to be done till the summer. 
For two or three months longer I shall remain where I am, and as
"And I am quite serious too, I assure you," replied Mrs. Elton gaily,
"in resolving to be always on the watch, and employing my friends
to watch also, that nothing really unexceptionable may pass us."
In this style she ran on; never thoroughly stopped by any thing
till Mr. Woodhouse came into the room; her vanity had then a change
of object, and Emma heard her saying in the same half-whisper to Jane,
"Here comes this dear old beau of mine, I protest!--Only think of his
gallantry in coming away before the other men!--what a dear creature
he is;--I assure you I like him excessively.  I admire all that quaint,
old-fashioned politeness; it is much more to my taste than modern ease;
modern ease often disgusts me.  But this good old Mr. Woodhouse,
I wish you had heard his gallant speeches to me at dinner.  Oh!  I assure
you I began to think my caro sposo would be absolutely jealous. 
I fancy I am rather a favourite; he took notice of my gown. 
How do you like it?--Selina's choice--handsome, I think, but I
do not know whether it is not over-trimmed; I have the greatest
dislike to the idea of being over-trimmed--quite a horror of finery. 
I must put on a few ornaments now, because it is expected of me. 
A bride, you know, must appear like a bride, but my natural taste
is all for simplicity; a simple style of dress is so infinitely
preferable to finery.  But I am quite in the minority, I believe;
few people seem to value simplicity of dress,--show and finery
are every thing.  I have some notion of putting such a trimming
as this to my white and silver poplin.  Do you think it will
The whole party were but just reassembled in the drawing-room
when Mr. Weston made his appearance among them.  He had returned
to a late dinner, and walked to Hartfield as soon as it was over. 
He had been too much expected by the best judges, for surprize--
but there was great joy.  Mr. Woodhouse was almost as glad to see
him now, as he would have been sorry to see him before.  John Knightley
only was in mute astonishment.--That a man who might have spent
his evening quietly at home after a day of business in London,
should set off again, and walk half a mile to another man's house,
for the sake of being in mixed company till bed-time, of finishing
his day in the efforts of civility and the noise of numbers,
was a circumstance to strike him deeply.  A man who had been in motion
since eight o'clock in the morning, and might now have been still,
who had been long talking, and might have been silent, who had been
in more than one crowd, and might have been alone!--Such a man,
to quit the tranquillity and independence of his own fireside,
and on the evening of a cold sleety April day rush out again into
the world!--Could he by a touch of his finger have instantly taken
back his wife, there would have been a motive; but his coming would
probably prolong rather than break up the party.  John Knightley
looked at him with amazement, then shrugged his shoulders, and said,
Mr. Weston meanwhile, perfectly unsuspicious of the indignation
he was exciting, happy and cheerful as usual, and with all
the right of being principal talker, which a day spent anywhere
from home confers, was making himself agreeable among the rest;
and having satisfied the inquiries of his wife as to his dinner,
convincing her that none of all her careful directions to the servants
had been forgotten, and spread abroad what public news he had heard,
was proceeding to a family communication, which, though principally
addressed to Mrs. Weston, he had not the smallest doubt of being
highly interesting to every body in the room.  He gave her a letter,
it was from Frank, and to herself; he had met with it in his way,
"Read it, read it," said he, "it will give you pleasure;
only a few lines--will not take you long; read it to Emma."
The two ladies looked over it together; and he sat smiling
and talking to them the whole time, in a voice a little subdued,
"Well, he is coming, you see; good news, I think.  Well, what do
you say to it?--I always told you he would be here again soon,
did not I?--Anne, my dear, did not I always tell you so, and you would
not believe me?--In town next week, you see--at the latest, I dare say;
for she is as impatient as the black gentleman when any thing is
to be done; most likely they will be there to-morrow or Saturday. 
As to her illness, all nothing of course.  But it is an excellent
thing to have Frank among us again, so near as town.  They will stay
a good while when they do come, and he will be half his time with us. 
This is precisely what I wanted.  Well, pretty good news, is not it? 
Have you finished it?  Has Emma read it all?  Put it up, put it up;
we will have a good talk about it some other time, but it will not
do now.  I shall only just mention the circumstance to the others in a
Mrs. Weston was most comfortably pleased on the occasion. 
Her looks and words had nothing to restrain them.  She was happy,
she knew she was happy, and knew she ought to be happy. 
Her congratulations were warm and open; but Emma could not speak
so fluently.  She was a little occupied in weighing her own feelings,
and trying to understand the degree of her agitation, which she
Mr. Weston, however, too eager to be very observant, too communicative
to want others to talk, was very well satisfied with what she did say,
and soon moved away to make the rest of his friends happy by a partial
communication of what the whole room must have overheard already.
It was well that he took every body's joy for granted, or he
might not have thought either Mr. Woodhouse or Mr. Knightley
particularly delighted.  They were the first entitled,
after Mrs. Weston and Emma, to be made happy;--from them he would
have proceeded to Miss Fairfax, but she was so deep in conversation
with John Knightley, that it would have been too positive
an interruption; and finding himself close to Mrs. Elton, and
her attention disengaged, he necessarily began on the subject with her.
"I hope I shall soon have the pleasure of introducing my son to you,"
Mrs. Elton, very willing to suppose a particular compliment intended
"You have heard of a certain Frank Churchill, I presume," he continued--
"and know him to be my son, though he does not bear my name."
"Oh! yes, and I shall be very happy in his acquaintance. 
I am sure Mr. Elton will lose no time in calling on him; and we
shall both have great pleasure in seeing him at the Vicarage."
"You are very obliging.--Frank will be extremely happy, I am sure.--
He is to be in town next week, if not sooner.  We have notice of it
in a letter to-day. I met the letters in my way this morning,
and seeing my son's hand, presumed to open it--though it was not directed
to me--it was to Mrs. Weston.  She is his principal correspondent,
"And so you absolutely opened what was directed to her!  Oh!  Mr. Weston--
(laughing affectedly) I must protest against that.--A most dangerous
precedent indeed!--I beg you will not let your neighbours follow
your example.--Upon my word, if this is what I am to expect,
we married women must begin to exert ourselves!--Oh!  Mr. Weston,
"Aye, we men are sad fellows.  You must take care of yourself,
Mrs. Elton.--This letter tells us--it is a short letter--written in
a hurry, merely to give us notice--it tells us that they are all
coming up to town directly, on Mrs. Churchill's account--she has
not been well the whole winter, and thinks Enscombe too cold for her--
so they are all to move southward without loss of time."
"Indeed!--from Yorkshire, I think.  Enscombe is in Yorkshire?"
"Yes, they are about one hundred and ninety miles from London. 
"Yes, upon my word, very considerable.  Sixty-five miles farther
than from Maple Grove to London.  But what is distance, Mr. Weston,
to people of large fortune?--You would be amazed to hear how my brother,
Mr. Suckling, sometimes flies about.  You will hardly believe me--
but twice in one week he and Mr. Bragge went to London and back again
"The evil of the distance from Enscombe," said Mr. Weston, "is, that
Mrs. Churchill, as we understand, has not been able to leave the
sofa for a week together.  In Frank's last letter she complained,
he said, of being too weak to get into her conservatory without having
both his arm and his uncle's! This, you know, speaks a great degree
of weakness--but now she is so impatient to be in town, that she
means to sleep only two nights on the road.--So Frank writes word. 
Certainly, delicate ladies have very extraordinary constitutions,
"No, indeed, I shall grant you nothing.  I Always take the part
of my own sex.  I do indeed.  I give you notice--You will find me
a formidable antagonist on that point.  I always stand up for women--
and I assure you, if you knew how Selina feels with respect
to sleeping at an inn, you would not wonder at Mrs. Churchill's
making incredible exertions to avoid it.  Selina says it is quite
horror to her--and I believe I have caught a little of her nicety. 
She always travels with her own sheets; an excellent precaution. 
"Depend upon it, Mrs. Churchill does every thing that any other
fine lady ever did.  Mrs. Churchill will not be second to any lady
"Oh!  Mr. Weston, do not mistake me.  Selina is no fine lady,
I assure you.  Do not run away with such an idea."
"Is not she?  Then she is no rule for Mrs. Churchill, who is
Mrs. Elton began to think she had been wrong in disclaiming so warmly. 
It was by no means her object to have it believed that her sister
was not a fine lady; perhaps there was want of spirit in the pretence
of it;--and she was considering in what way she had best retract,
"Mrs. Churchill is not much in my good graces, as you may suspect--
but this is quite between ourselves.  She is very fond of Frank,
and therefore I would not speak ill of her.  Besides, she is out of
health now; but that indeed, by her own account, she has always been. 
I would not say so to every body, Mrs. Elton, but I have not much
"If she is really ill, why not go to Bath, Mr. Weston?--To Bath,
or to Clifton?"  "She has taken it into her head that Enscombe is too
cold for her.  The fact is, I suppose, that she is tired of Enscombe. 
She has now been a longer time stationary there, than she ever
was before, and she begins to want change.  It is a retired place. 
"Aye--like Maple Grove, I dare say.  Nothing can stand more retired from
the road than Maple Grove.  Such an immense plantation all round it! 
You seem shut out from every thing--in the most complete retirement.--
And Mrs. Churchill probably has not health or spirits like Selina
to enjoy that sort of seclusion.  Or, perhaps she may not have
resources enough in herself to be qualified for a country life. 
I always say a woman cannot have too many resources--and I feel
very thankful that I have so many myself as to be quite independent
"So I remember to have heard.  He will find an addition to the
society of Highbury when he comes again; that is, if I may presume
to call myself an addition.  But perhaps he may never have heard
This was too loud a call for a compliment to be passed by,
and Mr. Weston, with a very good grace, immediately exclaimed,
"My dear madam!  Nobody but yourself could imagine such a
thing possible.  Not heard of you!--I believe Mrs. Weston's
letters lately have been full of very little else than Mrs. Elton."
"When Frank left us," continued he, "it was quite uncertain when we
might see him again, which makes this day's news doubly welcome. 
It has been completely unexpected.  That is, I always had a strong
persuasion he would be here again soon, I was sure something
favourable would turn up--but nobody believed me.  He and Mrs. Weston
were both dreadfully desponding.  `How could he contrive to come? 
And how could it be supposed that his uncle and aunt would spare
him again?' and so forth--I always felt that something would happen
in our favour; and so it has, you see.  I have observed, Mrs. Elton,
in the course of my life, that if things are going untowardly one month,
"Very true, Mr. Weston, perfectly true.  It is just what I used
to say to a certain gentleman in company in the days of courtship,
when, because things did not go quite right, did not proceed with all
the rapidity which suited his feelings, he was apt to be in despair,
and exclaim that he was sure at this rate it would be May before
Hymen's saffron robe would be put on for us.  Oh! the pains I have
been at to dispel those gloomy ideas and give him cheerfuller views! 
The carriage--we had disappointments about the carriage;--one morning,
She was stopped by a slight fit of coughing, and Mr. Weston instantly
"You were mentioning May.  May is the very month which Mrs. Churchill
is ordered, or has ordered herself, to spend in some warmer place
than Enscombe--in short, to spend in London; so that we have the
agreeable prospect of frequent visits from Frank the whole spring--
precisely the season of the year which one should have chosen
for it:  days almost at the longest; weather genial and pleasant,
always inviting one out, and never too hot for exercise.  When he
was here before, we made the best of it; but there was a good deal
of wet, damp, cheerless weather; there always is in February, you know,
and we could not do half that we intended.  Now will be the time. 
This will be complete enjoyment; and I do not know, Mrs. Elton,
whether the uncertainty of our meetings, the sort of constant
expectation there will be of his coming in to-day or to-morrow,
and at any hour, may not be more friendly to happiness than having
him actually in the house.  I think it is so.  I think it is the
state of mind which gives most spirit and delight.  I hope you
will be pleased with my son; but you must not expect a prodigy. 
He is generally thought a fine young man, but do not expect a prodigy. 
Mrs. Weston's partiality for him is very great, and, as you may suppose,
most gratifying to me.  She thinks nobody equal to him."
"And I assure you, Mr. Weston, I have very little doubt that my
opinion will be decidedly in his favour.  I have heard so much
in praise of Mr. Frank Churchill.--At the same time it is fair
to observe, that I am one of those who always judge for themselves,
and are by no means implicitly guided by others.  I give you notice
that as I find your son, so I shall judge of him.--I am no flatterer."
"I hope," said he presently, "I have not been severe upon poor
Mrs. Churchill.  If she is ill I should be sorry to do her injustice;
but there are some traits in her character which make it difficult
for me to speak of her with the forbearance I could wish. 
You cannot be ignorant, Mrs. Elton, of my connexion with the family,
nor of the treatment I have met with; and, between ourselves,
the whole blame of it is to be laid to her.  She was the instigator. 
Frank's mother would never have been slighted as she was but for her. 
Mr. Churchill has pride; but his pride is nothing to his wife's:
his is a quiet, indolent, gentlemanlike sort of pride that would
harm nobody, and only make himself a little helpless and tiresome;
but her pride is arrogance and insolence!  And what inclines one less
to bear, she has no fair pretence of family or blood.  She was nobody
when he married her, barely the daughter of a gentleman; but ever
since her being turned into a Churchill she has out-Churchill'd them
all in high and mighty claims:  but in herself, I assure you, she is
"Only think! well, that must be infinitely provoking!  I have quite
a horror of upstarts.  Maple Grove has given me a thorough disgust
to people of that sort; for there is a family in that neighbourhood
who are such an annoyance to my brother and sister from the airs
they give themselves!  Your description of Mrs. Churchill made me
think of them directly.  People of the name of Tupman, very lately
settled there, and encumbered with many low connexions, but giving
themselves immense airs, and expecting to be on a footing with the old
established families.  A year and a half is the very utmost that they can
have lived at West Hall; and how they got their fortune nobody knows. 
They came from Birmingham, which is not a place to promise much,
you know, Mr. Weston.  One has not great hopes from Birmingham. 
I always say there is something direful in the sound:  but nothing
more is positively known of the Tupmans, though a good many things
I assure you are suspected; and yet by their manners they evidently
think themselves equal even to my brother, Mr. Suckling, who happens
to be one of their nearest neighbours.  It is infinitely too bad. 
Mr. Suckling, who has been eleven years a resident at Maple Grove,
and whose father had it before him--I believe, at least--I am
almost sure that old Mr. Suckling had completed the purchase before
They were interrupted.  Tea was carrying round, and Mr. Weston,
having said all that he wanted, soon took the opportunity of
After tea, Mr. and Mrs. Weston, and Mr. Elton sat down with Mr. Woodhouse
to cards.  The remaining five were left to their own powers,
and Emma doubted their getting on very well; for Mr. Knightley seemed
little disposed for conversation; Mrs. Elton was wanting notice,
which nobody had inclination to pay, and she was herself
in a worry of spirits which would have made her prefer being silent.
Mr. John Knightley proved more talkative than his brother. 
He was to leave them early the next day; and he soon began with--
"Well, Emma, I do not believe I have any thing more to say about
the boys; but you have your sister's letter, and every thing is
down at full length there we may be sure.  My charge would be much
more concise than her's, and probably not much in the same spirit;
all that I have to recommend being comprised in, do not spoil them,
"I rather hope to satisfy you both," said Emma, "for I shall do all
in my power to make them happy, which will be enough for Isabella;
and happiness must preclude false indulgence and physic."
"And if you find them troublesome, you must send them home again."
"I hope I am aware that they may be too noisy for your father--
or even may be some encumbrance to you, if your visiting engagements
continue to increase as much as they have done lately."
"Certainly; you must be sensible that the last half-year has made
"There can be no doubt of your being much more engaged with company
than you used to be.  Witness this very time.  Here am I come
down for only one day, and you are engaged with a dinner-party!--
When did it happen before, or any thing like it?  Your neighbourhood
is increasing, and you mix more with it.  A little while ago,
every letter to Isabella brought an account of fresh gaieties;
dinners at Mr. Cole's, or balls at the Crown.  The difference
which Randalls, Randalls alone makes in your goings-on, is very great."
"Yes," said his brother quickly, "it is Randalls that does it all."
"Very well--and as Randalls, I suppose, is not likely to have less
influence than heretofore, it strikes me as a possible thing, Emma,
that Henry and John may be sometimes in the way.  And if they are,
"No," cried Mr. Knightley, "that need not be the consequence. 
Let them be sent to Donwell.  I shall certainly be at leisure."
"Upon my word," exclaimed Emma, "you amuse me!  I should like to know
how many of all my numerous engagements take place without your being
of the party; and why I am to be supposed in danger of wanting leisure
to attend to the little boys.  These amazing engagements of mine--
what have they been?  Dining once with the Coles--and having a ball
talked of, which never took place.  I can understand you--(nodding at
Mr. John Knightley)--your good fortune in meeting with so many of
your friends at once here, delights you too much to pass unnoticed. 
But you, (turning to Mr. Knightley,) who know how very, very seldom
I am ever two hours from Hartfield, why you should foresee such a
series of dissipation for me, I cannot imagine.  And as to my dear
little boys, I must say, that if Aunt Emma has not time for them,
I do not think they would fare much better with Uncle Knightley,
who is absent from home about five hours where she is absent one--
and who, when he is at home, is either reading to himself or settling
Mr. Knightley seemed to be trying not to smile; and succeeded
without difficulty, upon Mrs. Elton's beginning to talk to him.
A very little quiet reflection was enough to satisfy Emma as to the
nature of her agitation on hearing this news of Frank Churchill. 
She was soon convinced that it was not for herself she was feeling at
all apprehensive or embarrassed; it was for him.  Her own attachment
had really subsided into a mere nothing; it was not worth thinking of;--
but if he, who had undoubtedly been always so much the most in love
of the two, were to be returning with the same warmth of sentiment
which he had taken away, it would be very distressing.  If a separation
of two months should not have cooled him, there were dangers and evils
before her:--caution for him and for herself would be necessary. 
She did not mean to have her own affections entangled again,
and it would be incumbent on her to avoid any encouragement of his.
She wished she might be able to keep him from an absolute declaration. 
That would be so very painful a conclusion of their present acquaintance!
and yet, she could not help rather anticipating something decisive. 
She felt as if the spring would not pass without bringing a crisis,
an event, a something to alter her present composed and tranquil state.
It was not very long, though rather longer than Mr. Weston had foreseen,
before she had the power of forming some opinion of Frank Churchill's
feelings.  The Enscombe family were not in town quite so soon as had
been imagined, but he was at Highbury very soon afterwards.  He rode
down for a couple of hours; he could not yet do more; but as he came
from Randalls immediately to Hartfield, she could then exercise all
her quick observation, and speedily determine how he was influenced,
and how she must act.  They met with the utmost friendliness. 
There could be no doubt of his great pleasure in seeing her. 
But she had an almost instant doubt of his caring for her as he
had done, of his feeling the same tenderness in the same degree. 
She watched him well.  It was a clear thing he was less in love than he
had been.  Absence, with the conviction probably of her indifference,
had produced this very natural and very desirable effect.
He was in high spirits; as ready to talk and laugh as ever, and seemed
delighted to speak of his former visit, and recur to old stories: 
and he was not without agitation.  It was not in his calmness that
she read his comparative difference.  He was not calm; his spirits
were evidently fluttered; there was restlessness about him. 
Lively as he was, it seemed a liveliness that did not satisfy himself;
but what decided her belief on the subject, was his staying only a
quarter of an hour, and hurrying away to make other calls in Highbury. 
"He had seen a group of old acquaintance in the street as he passed--
he had not stopped, he would not stop for more than a word--but he
had the vanity to think they would be disappointed if he did not call,
and much as he wished to stay longer at Hartfield, he must hurry off." 
She had no doubt as to his being less in love--but neither his
agitated spirits, nor his hurrying away, seemed like a perfect cure;
and she was rather inclined to think it implied a dread of her
returning power, and a discreet resolution of not trusting himself
This was the only visit from Frank Churchill in the course of ten days. 
He was often hoping, intending to come--but was always prevented. 
His aunt could not bear to have him leave her.  Such was his own account
at Randall's. If he were quite sincere, if he really tried to come,
it was to be inferred that Mrs. Churchill's removal to London had
been of no service to the wilful or nervous part of her disorder. 
That she was really ill was very certain; he had declared himself
convinced of it, at Randalls.  Though much might be fancy, he could
not doubt, when he looked back, that she was in a weaker state
of health than she had been half a year ago.  He did not believe it
to proceed from any thing that care and medicine might not remove,
or at least that she might not have many years of existence before her;
but he could not be prevailed on, by all his father's doubts, to say
that her complaints were merely imaginary, or that she was as strong
It soon appeared that London was not the place for her.  She could
not endure its noise.  Her nerves were under continual irritation
and suffering; and by the ten days' end, her nephew's letter to
Randalls communicated a change of plan.  They were going to remove
immediately to Richmond.  Mrs. Churchill had been recommended
to the medical skill of an eminent person there, and had otherwise
a fancy for the place.  A ready-furnished house in a favourite
spot was engaged, and much benefit expected from the change.
Emma heard that Frank wrote in the highest spirits of this arrangement,
and seemed most fully to appreciate the blessing of having two
months before him of such near neighbourhood to many dear friends--
for the house was taken for May and June.  She was told that now
he wrote with the greatest confidence of being often with them,
Emma saw how Mr. Weston understood these joyous prospects.  He was
considering her as the source of all the happiness they offered. 
She hoped it was not so.  Two months must bring it to the proof.
Mr. Weston's own happiness was indisputable.  He was quite delighted. 
It was the very circumstance he could have wished for.  Now, it would
be really having Frank in their neighbourhood.  What were nine miles
to a young man?--An hour's ride.  He would be always coming over. 
The difference in that respect of Richmond and London was enough
to make the whole difference of seeing him always and seeing
him never.  Sixteen miles--nay, eighteen--it must be full eighteen
to Manchester-street--was a serious obstacle.  Were he ever able
to get away, the day would be spent in coming and returning. 
There was no comfort in having him in London; he might as well be
at Enscombe; but Richmond was the very distance for easy intercourse. 
One good thing was immediately brought to a certainty by this removal,--
the ball at the Crown.  It had not been forgotten before, but it had
been soon acknowledged vain to attempt to fix a day.  Now, however,
it was absolutely to be; every preparation was resumed, and very soon
after the Churchills had removed to Richmond, a few lines from Frank,
to say that his aunt felt already much better for the change,
and that he had no doubt of being able to join them for twenty-four
hours at any given time, induced them to name as early a day as possible.
Mr. Weston's ball was to be a real thing.  A very few to-morrows
stood between the young people of Highbury and happiness.
Mr. Woodhouse was resigned.  The time of year lightened the evil
to him.  May was better for every thing than February.  Mrs. Bates
was engaged to spend the evening at Hartfield, James had due notice,
and he sanguinely hoped that neither dear little Henry nor dear
little John would have any thing the matter with them, while dear
No misfortune occurred, again to prevent the ball.  The day approached,
the day arrived; and after a morning of some anxious watching,
Frank Churchill, in all the certainty of his own self, reached Randalls
No second meeting had there yet been between him and Emma. 
The room at the Crown was to witness it;--but it would be better
than a common meeting in a crowd.  Mr. Weston had been so very
earnest in his entreaties for her arriving there as soon as possible
after themselves, for the purpose of taking her opinion as to the
propriety and comfort of the rooms before any other persons came,
that she could not refuse him, and must therefore spend some quiet
interval in the young man's company.  She was to convey Harriet,
and they drove to the Crown in good time, the Randalls party just
Frank Churchill seemed to have been on the watch; and though
he did not say much, his eyes declared that he meant to have
a delightful evening.  They all walked about together, to see
that every thing was as it should be; and within a few minutes
were joined by the contents of another carriage, which Emma
could not hear the sound of at first, without great surprize. 
"So unreasonably early!" she was going to exclaim; but she presently
found that it was a family of old friends, who were coming, like herself,
by particular desire, to help Mr. Weston's judgment; and they were
so very closely followed by another carriage of cousins, who had been
entreated to come early with the same distinguishing earnestness,
on the same errand, that it seemed as if half the company might
soon be collected together for the purpose of preparatory inspection.
Emma perceived that her taste was not the only taste on which
Mr. Weston depended, and felt, that to be the favourite and
intimate of a man who had so many intimates and confidantes,
was not the very first distinction in the scale of vanity. 
She liked his open manners, but a little less of open-heartedness
would have made him a higher character.--General benevolence,
but not general friendship, made a man what he ought to be.--
She could fancy such a man.  The whole party walked about,
and looked, and praised again; and then, having nothing else to do,
formed a sort of half-circle round the fire, to observe in their
various modes, till other subjects were started, that, though May,
Emma found that it was not Mr. Weston's fault that the number
of privy councillors was not yet larger.  They had stopped
at Mrs. Bates's door to offer the use of their carriage,
but the aunt and niece were to be brought by the Eltons.
Frank was standing by her, but not steadily; there was a restlessness,
which shewed a mind not at ease.  He was looking about, he was going
to the door, he was watching for the sound of other carriages,--
impatient to begin, or afraid of being always near her.
Mrs. Elton was spoken of.  "I think she must be here soon," said he. 
"I have a great curiosity to see Mrs. Elton, I have heard so much
of her.  It cannot be long, I think, before she comes."
A carriage was heard.  He was on the move immediately;
"I am forgetting that I am not acquainted with her.  I have never seen
either Mr. or Mrs. Elton.  I have no business to put myself forward."
Mr. and Mrs. Elton appeared; and all the smiles and the proprieties passed.
"But Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax!" said Mr. Weston, looking about. 
The mistake had been slight.  The carriage was sent for them now. 
Emma longed to know what Frank's first opinion of Mrs. Elton
might be; how he was affected by the studied elegance of her dress,
and her smiles of graciousness.  He was immediately qualifying
himself to form an opinion, by giving her very proper attention,
In a few minutes the carriage returned.--Somebody talked of rain.--
"I will see that there are umbrellas, sir," said Frank to his father: 
"Miss Bates must not be forgotten:"  and away he went.  Mr. Weston
was following; but Mrs. Elton detained him, to gratify him by her
opinion of his son; and so briskly did she begin, that the young
man himself, though by no means moving slowly, could hardly be out
"A very fine young man indeed, Mr. Weston.  You know I candidly told
you I should form my own opinion; and I am happy to say that I am
extremely pleased with him.--You may believe me.  I never compliment. 
I think him a very handsome young man, and his manners are precisely
what I like and approve--so truly the gentleman, without the least
conceit or puppyism.  You must know I have a vast dislike to puppies--
quite a horror of them.  They were never tolerated at Maple Grove. 
Neither Mr. Suckling nor me had ever any patience with them; and we
used sometimes to say very cutting things!  Selina, who is mild almost
While she talked of his son, Mr. Weston's attention was chained;
but when she got to Maple Grove, he could recollect that there were
ladies just arriving to be attended to, and with happy smiles must
Mrs. Elton turned to Mrs. Weston.  "I have no doubt of its being
our carriage with Miss Bates and Jane.  Our coachman and horses are
so extremely expeditious!--I believe we drive faster than any body.--
What a pleasure it is to send one's carriage for a friend!--
I understand you were so kind as to offer, but another time it
will be quite unnecessary.  You may be very sure I shall always
Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax, escorted by the two gentlemen,
walked into the room; and Mrs. Elton seemed to think it as much
her duty as Mrs. Weston's to receive them.  Her gestures and
movements might be understood by any one who looked on like Emma;
but her words, every body's words, were soon lost under the
incessant flow of Miss Bates, who came in talking, and had not
finished her speech under many minutes after her being admitted
into the circle at the fire.  As the door opened she was heard,
"So very obliging of you!--No rain at all.  Nothing to signify. 
I do not care for myself.  Quite thick shoes.  And Jane declares--
Well!--(as soon as she was within the door) Well!  This is brilliant
indeed!--This is admirable!--Excellently contrived, upon my word. 
Nothing wanting.  Could not have imagined it.--So well lighted up!--
Jane, Jane, look!--did you ever see any thing?  Oh!  Mr. Weston,
you must really have had Aladdin's lamp.  Good Mrs. Stokes
would not know her own room again.  I saw her as I came in;
she was standing in the entrance.  `Oh!  Mrs. Stokes,' said I--
but I had not time for more."  She was now met by Mrs. Weston.--
"Very well, I thank you, ma'am. I hope you are quite well. 
Very happy to hear it.  So afraid you might have a headach!--
seeing you pass by so often, and knowing how much trouble you must have. 
Delighted to hear it indeed.  Ah! dear Mrs. Elton, so obliged
to you for the carriage!--excellent time.  Jane and I quite ready. 
Did not keep the horses a moment.  Most comfortable carriage.--
Oh! and I am sure our thanks are due to you, Mrs. Weston, on that score. 
Mrs. Elton had most kindly sent Jane a note, or we should have been.--
But two such offers in one day!--Never were such neighbours. 
I said to my mother, `Upon my word, ma'am--.'  Thank you, my mother
is remarkably well.  Gone to Mr. Woodhouse's. I made her take
her shawl--for the evenings are not warm--her large new shawl--
Mrs. Dixon's wedding-present.--So kind of her to think of my mother! 
Bought at Weymouth, you know--Mr. Dixon's choice.  There were
three others, Jane says, which they hesitated about some time. 
Colonel Campbell rather preferred an olive.  My dear Jane,
are you sure you did not wet your feet?--It was but a drop or two,
but I am so afraid:--but Mr. Frank Churchill was so extremely--
and there was a mat to step upon--I shall never forget his
extreme politeness.--Oh!  Mr. Frank Churchill, I must tell you
my mother's spectacles have never been in fault since; the rivet
never came out again.  My mother often talks of your good-nature.
Does not she, Jane?--Do not we often talk of Mr. Frank Churchill?--
Ah! here's Miss Woodhouse.--Dear Miss Woodhouse, how do you do?--
Very well I thank you, quite well.  This is meeting quite in fairy-land!--
Such a transformation!--Must not compliment, I know (eyeing Emma
most complacently)--that would be rude--but upon my word, Miss Woodhouse,
you do look--how do you like Jane's hair?--You are a judge.--
She did it all herself.  Quite wonderful how she does her hair!--
No hairdresser from London I think could.--Ah! Dr. Hughes I declare--
and Mrs. Hughes.  Must go and speak to Dr. and Mrs. Hughes for
a moment.--How do you do?  How do you do?--Very well, I thank you. 
This is delightful, is not it?--Where's dear Mr. Richard?--
Oh! there he is.  Don't disturb him.  Much better employed talking
to the young ladies.  How do you do, Mr. Richard?--I saw you the
other day as you rode through the town--Mrs. Otway, I protest!--
and good Mr. Otway, and Miss Otway and Miss Caroline.--Such a host
of friends!--and Mr. George and Mr. Arthur!--How do you do?  How do
you all do?--Quite well, I am much obliged to you.  Never better.--
Don't I hear another carriage?--Who can this be?--very likely the
worthy Coles.--Upon my word, this is charming to be standing about
among such friends!  And such a noble fire!--I am quite roasted. 
No coffee, I thank you, for me--never take coffee.--A little tea
if you please, sir, by and bye,--no hurry--Oh! here it comes. 
Frank Churchill returned to his station by Emma; and as soon as Miss
Bates was quiet, she found herself necessarily overhearing the
discourse of Mrs. Elton and Miss Fairfax, who were standing a little
way behind her.--He was thoughtful.  Whether he were overhearing too,
she could not determine.  After a good many compliments to Jane
on her dress and look, compliments very quietly and properly taken,
Mrs. Elton was evidently wanting to be complimented herself--
and it was, "How do you like my gown?--How do you like my trimming?--
How has Wright done my hair?"--with many other relative questions,
all answered with patient politeness.  Mrs. Elton then said,
"Nobody can think less of dress in general than I do--but upon such
an occasion as this, when every body's eyes are so much upon me,
and in compliment to the Westons--who I have no doubt are giving
this ball chiefly to do me honour--I would not wish to be inferior
to others.  And I see very few pearls in the room except mine.--
So Frank Churchill is a capital dancer, I understand.--We shall see
if our styles suit.--A fine young man certainly is Frank Churchill. 
At this moment Frank began talking so vigorously, that Emma could
not but imagine he had overheard his own praises, and did not want
to hear more;--and the voices of the ladies were drowned for a while,
till another suspension brought Mrs. Elton's tones again distinctly
forward.--Mr. Elton had just joined them, and his wife was exclaiming,
"Oh! you have found us out at last, have you, in our seclusion?--
I was this moment telling Jane, I thought you would begin to be
"Jane!"--repeated Frank Churchill, with a look of surprize and displeasure.--
"That is easy--but Miss Fairfax does not disapprove it, I suppose."
"How do you like Mrs. Elton?" said Emma in a whisper.
"Ungrateful!--What do you mean?"  Then changing from a frown to
a smile--"No, do not tell me--I do not want to know what you mean.--
Where is my father?--When are we to begin dancing?"
Emma could hardly understand him; he seemed in an odd humour. 
He walked off to find his father, but was quickly back again with both
Mr. and Mrs. Weston.  He had met with them in a little perplexity,
which must be laid before Emma.  It had just occurred to Mrs. Weston
that Mrs. Elton must be asked to begin the ball; that she would
expect it; which interfered with all their wishes of giving Emma
that distinction.--Emma heard the sad truth with fortitude.
"And what are we to do for a proper partner for her?" said Mr. Weston. 
Frank turned instantly to Emma, to claim her former promise;
and boasted himself an engaged man, which his father looked his most
perfect approbation of--and it then appeared that Mrs. Weston was
wanting him to dance with Mrs. Elton himself, and that their business
was to help to persuade him into it, which was done pretty soon.--
Mr. Weston and Mrs. Elton led the way, Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss
Woodhouse followed.  Emma must submit to stand second to Mrs. Elton,
though she had always considered the ball as peculiarly for her. 
It was almost enough to make her think of marrying.  Mrs. Elton had
undoubtedly the advantage, at this time, in vanity completely gratified;
for though she had intended to begin with Frank Churchill, she could
not lose by the change.  Mr. Weston might be his son's superior.--
In spite of this little rub, however, Emma was smiling with enjoyment,
delighted to see the respectable length of the set as it was forming,
and to feel that she had so many hours of unusual festivity before her.--
She was more disturbed by Mr. Knightley's not dancing than by any
thing else.--There he was, among the standers-by, where he ought not
to be; he ought to be dancing,--not classing himself with the husbands,
and fathers, and whist-players, who were pretending to feel an interest
in the dance till their rubbers were made up,--so young as he looked!--
He could not have appeared to greater advantage perhaps anywhere,
than where he had placed himself.  His tall, firm, upright figure,
among the bulky forms and stooping shoulders of the elderly men,
was such as Emma felt must draw every body's eyes; and, excepting her
own partner, there was not one among the whole row of young men
who could be compared with him.--He moved a few steps nearer,
and those few steps were enough to prove in how gentlemanlike
a manner, with what natural grace, he must have danced, would he
but take the trouble.--Whenever she caught his eye, she forced him
to smile; but in general he was looking grave.  She wished he could
love a ballroom better, and could like Frank Churchill better.--
He seemed often observing her.  She must not flatter herself that he
thought of her dancing, but if he were criticising her behaviour,
she did not feel afraid.  There was nothing like flirtation between
her and her partner.  They seemed more like cheerful, easy friends,
than lovers.  That Frank Churchill thought less of her than he had done,
The ball proceeded pleasantly.  The anxious cares, the incessant
attentions of Mrs. Weston, were not thrown away.  Every body
seemed happy; and the praise of being a delightful ball,
which is seldom bestowed till after a ball has ceased to be,
was repeatedly given in the very beginning of the existence of this. 
Of very important, very recordable events, it was not more productive
than such meetings usually are.  There was one, however, which Emma
thought something of.--The two last dances before supper were begun,
and Harriet had no partner;--the only young lady sitting down;--
and so equal had been hitherto the number of dancers, that how there
could be any one disengaged was the wonder!--But Emma's wonder
lessened soon afterwards, on seeing Mr. Elton sauntering about. 
He would not ask Harriet to dance if it were possible to be avoided: 
she was sure he would not--and she was expecting him every moment to
Escape, however, was not his plan.  He came to the part of the room
where the sitters-by were collected, spoke to some, and walked about
in front of them, as if to shew his liberty, and his resolution
of maintaining it.  He did not omit being sometimes directly
before Miss Smith, or speaking to those who were close to her.--
Emma saw it.  She was not yet dancing; she was working her way
up from the bottom, and had therefore leisure to look around,
and by only turning her head a little she saw it all.  When she was
half-way up the set, the whole group were exactly behind her, and she
would no longer allow her eyes to watch; but Mr. Elton was so near,
that she heard every syllable of a dialogue which just then took
place between him and Mrs. Weston; and she perceived that his wife,
who was standing immediately above her, was not only listening also,
but even encouraging him by significant glances.--The kind-hearted,
gentle Mrs. Weston had left her seat to join him and say, "Do not
you dance, Mr. Elton?" to which his prompt reply was, "Most readily,
"Me!--oh! no--I would get you a better partner than myself. 
"If Mrs. Gilbert wishes to dance," said he, "I shall have great pleasure,
I am sure--for, though beginning to feel myself rather an old married man,
and that my dancing days are over, it would give me very great
pleasure at any time to stand up with an old friend like Mrs. Gilbert."
"Mrs. Gilbert does not mean to dance, but there is a young lady
disengaged whom I should be very glad to see dancing--Miss Smith." 
"Miss Smith!--oh!--I had not observed.--You are extremely obliging--
and if I were not an old married man.--But my dancing days are over,
Mrs. Weston.  You will excuse me.  Any thing else I should be most happy
to do, at your command--but my dancing days are over."
Mrs. Weston said no more; and Emma could imagine with what
surprize and mortification she must be returning to her seat. 
This was Mr. Elton! the amiable, obliging, gentle Mr. Elton.--
She looked round for a moment; he had joined Mr. Knightley at a
little distance, and was arranging himself for settled conversation,
while smiles of high glee passed between him and his wife.
She would not look again.  Her heart was in a glow, and she feared
In another moment a happier sight caught her;--Mr. Knightley
leading Harriet to the set!--Never had she been more surprized,
seldom more delighted, than at that instant.  She was all pleasure
and gratitude, both for Harriet and herself, and longed to be
thanking him; and though too distant for speech, her countenance
said much, as soon as she could catch his eye again.
His dancing proved to be just what she had believed it,
extremely good; and Harriet would have seemed almost too lucky,
if it had not been for the cruel state of things before, and for
the very complete enjoyment and very high sense of the distinction
which her happy features announced.  It was not thrown away on her,
she bounded higher than ever, flew farther down the middle,
Mr. Elton had retreated into the card-room, looking (Emma trusted)
very foolish.  She did not think he was quite so hardened as his wife,
though growing very like her;--she spoke some of her feelings,
"Knightley has taken pity on poor little Miss Smith!--Very goodnatured,
Supper was announced.  The move began; and Miss Bates might be
heard from that moment, without interruption, till her being
"Jane, Jane, my dear Jane, where are you?--Here is your tippet. 
Mrs. Weston begs you to put on your tippet.  She says she is afraid
there will be draughts in the passage, though every thing has
been done--One door nailed up--Quantities of matting--My dear Jane,
indeed you must.  Mr. Churchill, oh! you are too obliging! 
How well you put it on!--so gratified!  Excellent dancing indeed!--
Yes, my dear, I ran home, as I said I should, to help grandmama
to bed, and got back again, and nobody missed me.--I set off without
saying a word, just as I told you.  Grandmama was quite well,
had a charming evening with Mr. Woodhouse, a vast deal of chat,
and backgammon.--Tea was made downstairs, biscuits and baked apples
and wine before she came away:  amazing luck in some of her throws: 
and she inquired a great deal about you, how you were amused,
and who were your partners.  `Oh!' said I, `I shall not forestall Jane;
I left her dancing with Mr. George Otway; she will love to tell you
all about it herself to-morrow: her first partner was Mr. Elton,
I do not know who will ask her next, perhaps Mr. William Cox.' 
My dear sir, you are too obliging.--Is there nobody you would
not rather?--I am not helpless.  Sir, you are most kind.  Upon my word,
Jane on one arm, and me on the other!--Stop, stop, let us stand
a little back, Mrs. Elton is going; dear Mrs. Elton, how elegant
she looks!--Beautiful lace!--Now we all follow in her train. 
Quite the queen of the evening!--Well, here we are at the passage. 
Two steps, Jane, take care of the two steps.  Oh! no, there is
but one.  Well, I was persuaded there were two.  How very odd! 
I was convinced there were two, and there is but one.  I never saw any
thing equal to the comfort and style--Candles everywhere.--I was telling
you of your grandmama, Jane,--There was a little disappointment.--
The baked apples and biscuits, excellent in their way, you know;
but there was a delicate fricassee of sweetbread and some asparagus
brought in at first, and good Mr. Woodhouse, not thinking the
asparagus quite boiled enough, sent it all out again.  Now there
is nothing grandmama loves better than sweetbread and asparagus--
so she was rather disappointed, but we agreed we would not speak of it
to any body, for fear of its getting round to dear Miss Woodhouse,
who would be so very much concerned!--Well, this is brilliant! 
I am all amazement! could not have supposed any thing!--Such
elegance and profusion!--I have seen nothing like it since--
Well, where shall we sit? where shall we sit?  Anywhere, so that
Jane is not in a draught.  Where I sit is of no consequence. 
Oh! do you recommend this side?--Well, I am sure, Mr. Churchill--
only it seems too good--but just as you please.  What you direct
in this house cannot be wrong.  Dear Jane, how shall we ever
recollect half the dishes for grandmama?  Soup too!  Bless me! 
I should not be helped so soon, but it smells most excellent, and I
Emma had no opportunity of speaking to Mr. Knightley till
after supper; but, when they were all in the ballroom again,
her eyes invited him irresistibly to come to her and be thanked. 
He was warm in his reprobation of Mr. Elton's conduct; it had been
unpardonable rudeness; and Mrs. Elton's looks also received the due
"They aimed at wounding more than Harriet," said he.  "Emma, why
He looked with smiling penetration; and, on receiving
no answer, added, "She ought not to be angry with you, I suspect,
whatever he may be.--To that surmise, you say nothing, of course;
but confess, Emma, that you did want him to marry Harriet."
"I did," replied Emma, "and they cannot forgive me."
He shook his head; but there was a smile of indulgence with it,
"I shall not scold you.  I leave you to your own reflections."
"Can you trust me with such flatterers?--Does my vain spirit ever
"Not your vain spirit, but your serious spirit.--If one leads
"I do own myself to have been completely mistaken in Mr. Elton. 
There is a littleness about him which you discovered, and which I
did not:  and I was fully convinced of his being in love with Harriet. 
"And, in return for your acknowledging so much, I will do you the justice
to say, that you would have chosen for him better than he has chosen for
himself.--Harriet Smith has some first-rate qualities, which Mrs. Elton
is totally without.  An unpretending, single-minded, artless girl--
infinitely to be preferred by any man of sense and taste to such
a woman as Mrs. Elton.  I found Harriet more conversable than I expected."
Emma was extremely gratified.--They were interrupted by the bustle
of Mr. Weston calling on every body to begin dancing again.
"Come Miss Woodhouse, Miss Otway, Miss Fairfax, what are you all doing?--
Come Emma, set your companions the example.  Every body is lazy! 
"Whom are you going to dance with?" asked Mr. Knightley.
She hesitated a moment, and then replied, "With you, if you will
"Indeed I will.  You have shewn that you can dance, and you know we
are not really so much brother and sister as to make it at all improper."
This little explanation with Mr. Knightley gave Emma considerable
pleasure.  It was one of the agreeable recollections of the ball,
which she walked about the lawn the next morning to enjoy.--She was
extremely glad that they had come to so good an understanding respecting
the Eltons, and that their opinions of both husband and wife were so
much alike; and his praise of Harriet, his concession in her favour,
was peculiarly gratifying.  The impertinence of the Eltons, which for
a few minutes had threatened to ruin the rest of her evening, had been
the occasion of some of its highest satisfactions; and she looked
forward to another happy result--the cure of Harriet's infatuation.--
From Harriet's manner of speaking of the circumstance before they
quitted the ballroom, she had strong hopes.  It seemed as if her eyes
were suddenly opened, and she were enabled to see that Mr. Elton
was not the superior creature she had believed him.  The fever
was over, and Emma could harbour little fear of the pulse being
quickened again by injurious courtesy.  She depended on the evil
feelings of the Eltons for supplying all the discipline of pointed
neglect that could be farther requisite.--Harriet rational,
Frank Churchill not too much in love, and Mr. Knightley not
wanting to quarrel with her, how very happy a summer must be before her!
She was not to see Frank Churchill this morning.  He had told
her that he could not allow himself the pleasure of stopping
at Hartfield, as he was to be at home by the middle of the day. 
Having arranged all these matters, looked them through, and put them all
to rights, she was just turning to the house with spirits freshened up
for the demands of the two little boys, as well as of their grandpapa,
when the great iron sweep-gate opened, and two persons entered
whom she had never less expected to see together--Frank Churchill,
with Harriet leaning on his arm--actually Harriet!--A moment
sufficed to convince her that something extraordinary had happened. 
Harriet looked white and frightened, and he was trying to cheer her.--
The iron gates and the front-door were not twenty yards asunder;--
they were all three soon in the hall, and Harriet immediately sinking
A young lady who faints, must be recovered; questions must be answered,
and surprizes be explained.  Such events are very interesting,
but the suspense of them cannot last long.  A few minutes made Emma
Miss Smith, and Miss Bickerton, another parlour boarder at
Mrs. Goddard's, who had been also at the ball, had walked out together,
and taken a road, the Richmond road, which, though apparently public
enough for safety, had led them into alarm.--About half a mile
beyond Highbury, making a sudden turn, and deeply shaded by elms
on each side, it became for a considerable stretch very retired;
and when the young ladies had advanced some way into it,
they had suddenly perceived at a small distance before them,
on a broader patch of greensward by the side, a party of gipsies. 
A child on the watch, came towards them to beg; and Miss Bickerton,
excessively frightened, gave a great scream, and calling on Harriet
to follow her, ran up a steep bank, cleared a slight hedge at the top,
and made the best of her way by a short cut back to Highbury. 
But poor Harriet could not follow.  She had suffered very much
from cramp after dancing, and her first attempt to mount the bank
brought on such a return of it as made her absolutely powerless--
and in this state, and exceedingly terrified, she had been obliged
How the trampers might have behaved, had the young ladies been
more courageous, must be doubtful; but such an invitation for attack
could not be resisted; and Harriet was soon assailed by half a
dozen children, headed by a stout woman and a great boy, all clamorous,
and impertinent in look, though not absolutely in word.--More and
more frightened, she immediately promised them money, and taking out
her purse, gave them a shilling, and begged them not to want more,
or to use her ill.--She was then able to walk, though but slowly,
and was moving away--but her terror and her purse were too tempting,
and she was followed, or rather surrounded, by the whole gang,
In this state Frank Churchill had found her, she trembling
and conditioning, they loud and insolent.  By a most fortunate
chance his leaving Highbury had been delayed so as to bring him
to her assistance at this critical moment.  The pleasantness
of the morning had induced him to walk forward, and leave his
horses to meet him by another road, a mile or two beyond Highbury--
and happening to have borrowed a pair of scissors the night before
of Miss Bates, and to have forgotten to restore them, he had
been obliged to stop at her door, and go in for a few minutes: 
he was therefore later than he had intended; and being on foot,
was unseen by the whole party till almost close to them. 
The terror which the woman and boy had been creating in Harriet
was then their own portion.  He had left them completely frightened;
and Harriet eagerly clinging to him, and hardly able to speak,
had just strength enough to reach Hartfield, before her spirits
were quite overcome.  It was his idea to bring her to Hartfield: 
This was the amount of the whole story,--of his communication and
of Harriet's as soon as she had recovered her senses and speech.--
He dared not stay longer than to see her well; these several delays
left him not another minute to lose; and Emma engaging to give
assurance of her safety to Mrs. Goddard, and notice of there
being such a set of people in the neighbourhood to Mr. Knightley,
he set off, with all the grateful blessings that she could utter
Such an adventure as this,--a fine young man and a lovely young
woman thrown together in such a way, could hardly fail of suggesting
certain ideas to the coldest heart and the steadiest brain. 
So Emma thought, at least.  Could a linguist, could a grammarian,
could even a mathematician have seen what she did, have witnessed their
appearance together, and heard their history of it, without feeling
that circumstances had been at work to make them peculiarly interesting
to each other?--How much more must an imaginist, like herself,
be on fire with speculation and foresight!--especially with such
a groundwork of anticipation as her mind had already made.
It was a very extraordinary thing!  Nothing of the sort had ever
occurred before to any young ladies in the place, within her memory;
no rencontre, no alarm of the kind;--and now it had happened
to the very person, and at the very hour, when the other very
person was chancing to pass by to rescue her!--It certainly
was very extraordinary!--And knowing, as she did, the favourable
state of mind of each at this period, it struck her the more. 
He was wishing to get the better of his attachment to herself,
she just recovering from her mania for Mr. Elton.  It seemed as if
every thing united to promise the most interesting consequences. 
It was not possible that the occurrence should not be strongly
In the few minutes' conversation which she had yet had with him,
while Harriet had been partially insensible, he had spoken of her terror,
her naivete, her fervour as she seized and clung to his arm, with a
sensibility amused and delighted; and just at last, after Harriet's
own account had been given, he had expressed his indignation
at the abominable folly of Miss Bickerton in the warmest terms. 
Every thing was to take its natural course, however, neither impelled
nor assisted.  She would not stir a step, nor drop a hint. 
No, she had had enough of interference.  There could be no harm
in a scheme, a mere passive scheme.  It was no more than a wish. 
Emma's first resolution was to keep her father from the knowledge
of what had passed,--aware of the anxiety and alarm it would occasion: 
but she soon felt that concealment must be impossible.  Within half
an hour it was known all over Highbury.  It was the very event
to engage those who talk most, the young and the low; and all
the youth and servants in the place were soon in the happiness of
frightful news.  The last night's ball seemed lost in the gipsies. 
Poor Mr. Woodhouse trembled as he sat, and, as Emma had foreseen,
would scarcely be satisfied without their promising never to go
beyond the shrubbery again.  It was some comfort to him that many
inquiries after himself and Miss Woodhouse (for his neighbours
knew that he loved to be inquired after), as well as Miss Smith,
were coming in during the rest of the day; and he had the pleasure
of returning for answer, that they were all very indifferent--
which, though not exactly true, for she was perfectly well,
and Harriet not much otherwise, Emma would not interfere with. 
She had an unhappy state of health in general for the child of such
a man, for she hardly knew what indisposition was; and if he did not
invent illnesses for her, she could make no figure in a message.
The gipsies did not wait for the operations of justice; they took
themselves off in a hurry.  The young ladies of Highbury might have
walked again in safety before their panic began, and the whole
history dwindled soon into a matter of little importance but to Emma
and her nephews:--in her imagination it maintained its ground,
and Henry and John were still asking every day for the story of
Harriet and the gipsies, and still tenaciously setting her right
if she varied in the slightest particular from the original recital.
A very few days had passed after this adventure, when Harriet came
one morning to Emma with a small parcel in her hand, and after
"Miss Woodhouse--if you are at leisure--I have something that I
should like to tell you--a sort of confession to make--and then,
Emma was a good deal surprized; but begged her to speak. 
There was a seriousness in Harriet's manner which prepared her,
quite as much as her words, for something more than ordinary.
"It is my duty, and I am sure it is my wish," she continued,
"to have no reserves with you on this subject.  As I am happily
quite an altered creature in one respect, it is very fit that you
should have the satisfaction of knowing it.  I do not want to say
more than is necessary--I am too much ashamed of having given way
as I have done, and I dare say you understand me."
"How I could so long a time be fancying myself! . . ." 
cried Harriet, warmly.  "It seems like madness!  I can see nothing
at all extraordinary in him now.--I do not care whether I meet
him or not--except that of the two I had rather not see him--
and indeed I would go any distance round to avoid him--but I do
not envy his wife in the least; I neither admire her nor envy her,
as I have done:  she is very charming, I dare say, and all that,
but I think her very ill-tempered and disagreeable--I shall never forget
her look the other night!--However, I assure you, Miss Woodhouse,
I wish her no evil.--No, let them be ever so happy together,
it will not give me another moment's pang:  and to convince you
that I have been speaking truth, I am now going to destroy--what I
ought to have destroyed long ago--what I ought never to have kept--
I know that very well (blushing as she spoke).--However, now I
will destroy it all--and it is my particular wish to do it
in your presence, that you may see how rational I am grown. 
Cannot you guess what this parcel holds?" said she, with a conscious look.
"Not the least in the world.--Did he ever give you any thing?"
"No--I cannot call them gifts; but they are things that I have
She held the parcel towards her, and Emma read the words Most
precious treasures on the top.  Her curiosity was greatly excited. 
Harriet unfolded the parcel, and she looked on with impatience. 
Within abundance of silver paper was a pretty little Tunbridge-ware box,
which Harriet opened:  it was well lined with the softest cotton;
but, excepting the cotton, Emma saw only a small piece of court-plaister.
"Dear me!  I should not have thought it possible you could forget
what passed in this very room about court-plaister, one of the very
last times we ever met in it!--It was but a very few days before I
had my sore throat--just before Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley came--
I think the very evening.--Do not you remember his cutting his finger
with your new penknife, and your recommending court-plaister?--
But, as you had none about you, and knew I had, you desired
me to supply him; and so I took mine out and cut him a piece;
but it was a great deal too large, and he cut it smaller, and kept
playing some time with what was left, before he gave it back to me. 
And so then, in my nonsense, I could not help making a treasure of it--
so I put it by never to be used, and looked at it now and then
"My dearest Harriet!" cried Emma, putting her hand before her face,
and jumping up, "you make me more ashamed of myself than I can bear. 
Remember it?  Aye, I remember it all now; all, except your saving
this relic--I knew nothing of that till this moment--but the cutting
the finger, and my recommending court-plaister, and saying I had none
about me!--Oh! my sins, my sins!--And I had plenty all the while in
my pocket!--One of my senseless tricks!--I deserve to be under a
continual blush all the rest of my life.--Well--(sitting down again)--
"And had you really some at hand yourself?  I am sure I never
"And so you actually put this piece of court-plaister by for his sake!"
said Emma, recovering from her state of shame and feeling divided
between wonder and amusement.  And secretly she added to herself,
"Lord bless me! when should I ever have thought of putting by in cotton
a piece of court-plaister that Frank Churchill had been pulling about! 
"Here," resumed Harriet, turning to her box again, "here is
something still more valuable, I mean that has been more valuable,
because this is what did really once belong to him, which the
Emma was quite eager to see this superior treasure.  It was the end
"This was really his," said Harriet.--"Do not you remember
one morning?--no, I dare say you do not.  But one morning--I forget
exactly the day--but perhaps it was the Tuesday or Wednesday before
that evening, he wanted to make a memorandum in his pocket-book;
it was about spruce-beer. Mr. Knightley had been telling him
something about brewing spruce-beer, and he wanted to put it down;
but when he took out his pencil, there was so little lead that he
soon cut it all away, and it would not do, so you lent him another,
and this was left upon the table as good for nothing.  But I kept
my eye on it; and, as soon as I dared, caught it up, and never
"I do remember it," cried Emma; "I perfectly remember it.--
Talking about spruce-beer.--Oh! yes--Mr. Knightley and I both saying we
liked it, and Mr. Elton's seeming resolved to learn to like it too. 
I perfectly remember it.--Stop; Mr. Knightley was standing just here,
was not he?  I have an idea he was standing just here."
"Ah!  I do not know.  I cannot recollect.--It is very odd,
but I cannot recollect.--Mr. Elton was sitting here, I remember,
"Oh! that's all.  I have nothing more to shew you, or to say--
except that I am now going to throw them both behind the fire,
"My poor dear Harriet! and have you actually found happiness
"Yes, simpleton as I was!--but I am quite ashamed of it now, and wish
I could forget as easily as I can burn them.  It was very wrong
of me, you know, to keep any remembrances, after he was married. 
I knew it was--but had not resolution enough to part with them."
"But, Harriet, is it necessary to burn the court-plaister?--I have
not a word to say for the bit of old pencil, but the court-plaister
"I shall be happier to burn it," replied Harriet.  "It has
a disagreeable look to me.  I must get rid of every thing.--
There it goes, and there is an end, thank Heaven! of Mr. Elton."
"And when," thought Emma, "will there be a beginning of Mr. Churchill?"
She had soon afterwards reason to believe that the beginning was
already made, and could not but hope that the gipsy, though she had
told no fortune, might be proved to have made Harriet's.--About a
fortnight after the alarm, they came to a sufficient explanation,
and quite undesignedly.  Emma was not thinking of it at the moment,
which made the information she received more valuable. 
She merely said, in the course of some trivial chat, "Well, Harriet,
whenever you marry I would advise you to do so and so"--and thought
no more of it, till after a minute's silence she heard Harriet
say in a very serious tone, "I shall never marry."
Emma then looked up, and immediately saw how it was; and after a
moment's debate, as to whether it should pass unnoticed or not, replied,
After another short hesitation, "I hope it does not proceed from--
"Mr. Elton indeed!" cried Harriet indignantly.--"Oh! no"--and Emma
could just catch the words, "so superior to Mr. Elton!"
She then took a longer time for consideration.  Should she proceed
no farther?--should she let it pass, and seem to suspect nothing?--
Perhaps Harriet might think her cold or angry if she did;
or perhaps if she were totally silent, it might only drive
Harriet into asking her to hear too much; and against any thing
like such an unreserve as had been, such an open and frequent
discussion of hopes and chances, she was perfectly resolved.--
She believed it would be wiser for her to say and know at once,
all that she meant to say and know.  Plain dealing was always best. 
She had previously determined how far she would proceed,
on any application of the sort; and it would be safer for both,
to have the judicious law of her own brain laid down with speed.--
"Harriet, I will not affect to be in doubt of your meaning. 
Your resolution, or rather your expectation of never marrying,
results from an idea that the person whom you might prefer,
would be too greatly your superior in situation to think of you. 
"Oh!  Miss Woodhouse, believe me I have not the presumption to suppose--
Indeed I am not so mad.--But it is a pleasure to me to admire him
at a distance--and to think of his infinite superiority to all
the rest of the world, with the gratitude, wonder, and veneration,
"I am not at all surprized at you, Harriet.  The service he rendered
"Service! oh! it was such an inexpressible obligation!--
The very recollection of it, and all that I felt at the time--
when I saw him coming--his noble look--and my wretchedness before. 
Such a change!  In one moment such a change!  From perfect misery
"It is very natural.  It is natural, and it is honourable.--
Yes, honourable, I think, to chuse so well and so gratefully.--
But that it will be a fortunate preference is more that I can promise. 
I do not advise you to give way to it, Harriet.  I do not by any
means engage for its being returned.  Consider what you are about. 
Perhaps it will be wisest in you to check your feelings while you can: 
at any rate do not let them carry you far, unless you are persuaded
of his liking you.  Be observant of him.  Let his behaviour be the
guide of your sensations.  I give you this caution now, because I
shall never speak to you again on the subject.  I am determined
against all interference.  Henceforward I know nothing of the matter. 
Let no name ever pass our lips.  We were very wrong before;
we will be cautious now.--He is your superior, no doubt, and there
do seem objections and obstacles of a very serious nature;
but yet, Harriet, more wonderful things have taken place, there have
been matches of greater disparity.  But take care of yourself. 
I would not have you too sanguine; though, however it may end,
be assured your raising your thoughts to him, is a mark of good taste
Harriet kissed her hand in silent and submissive gratitude. 
Emma was very decided in thinking such an attachment no bad thing
for her friend.  Its tendency would be to raise and refine her mind--
and it must be saving her from the danger of degradation.
In this state of schemes, and hopes, and connivance, June opened
upon Hartfield.  To Highbury in general it brought no material change. 
The Eltons were still talking of a visit from the Sucklings,
and of the use to be made of their barouche-landau; and Jane Fairfax
was still at her grandmother's; and as the return of the Campbells
from Ireland was again delayed, and August, instead of Midsummer,
fixed for it, she was likely to remain there full two months longer,
provided at least she were able to defeat Mrs. Elton's activity
in her service, and save herself from being hurried into a delightful
Mr. Knightley, who, for some reason best known to himself, had certainly
taken an early dislike to Frank Churchill, was only growing to dislike
him more.  He began to suspect him of some double dealing in his
pursuit of Emma.  That Emma was his object appeared indisputable. 
Every thing declared it; his own attentions, his father's hints,
his mother-in-law's guarded silence; it was all in unison;
words, conduct, discretion, and indiscretion, told the same story. 
But while so many were devoting him to Emma, and Emma herself making him
over to Harriet, Mr. Knightley began to suspect him of some inclination
to trifle with Jane Fairfax.  He could not understand it; but there
were symptoms of intelligence between them--he thought so at least--
symptoms of admiration on his side, which, having once observed,
he could not persuade himself to think entirely void of meaning,
however he might wish to escape any of Emma's errors of imagination. 
She was not present when the suspicion first arose.  He was dining
with the Randalls family, and Jane, at the Eltons'; and he had
seen a look, more than a single look, at Miss Fairfax, which,
from the admirer of Miss Woodhouse, seemed somewhat out of place. 
When he was again in their company, he could not help remembering
what he had seen; nor could he avoid observations which, unless it
brought him yet stronger suspicion of there being a something
of private liking, of private understanding even, between Frank
He had walked up one day after dinner, as he very often did,
to spend his evening at Hartfield.  Emma and Harriet were going
to walk; he joined them; and, on returning, they fell in with a
larger party, who, like themselves, judged it wisest to take their
exercise early, as the weather threatened rain; Mr. and Mrs. Weston
and their son, Miss Bates and her niece, who had accidentally met. 
They all united; and, on reaching Hartfield gates, Emma, who knew it
was exactly the sort of visiting that would be welcome to her father,
pressed them all to go in and drink tea with him.  The Randalls
party agreed to it immediately; and after a pretty long speech
from Miss Bates, which few persons listened to, she also found it
possible to accept dear Miss Woodhouse's most obliging invitation.
As they were turning into the grounds, Mr. Perry passed by on horseback. 
"By the bye," said Frank Churchill to Mrs. Weston presently,
"what became of Mr. Perry's plan of setting up his carriage?"
Mrs. Weston looked surprized, and said, "I did not know that he
"Nay, I had it from you.  You wrote me word of it three months ago."
"Indeed you did.  I remember it perfectly.  You mentioned it as
what was certainly to be very soon.  Mrs. Perry had told somebody,
and was extremely happy about it.  It was owing to her persuasion,
as she thought his being out in bad weather did him a great deal
"Upon my word I never heard of it till this moment."
"Never! really, never!--Bless me! how could it be?--Then I must
have dreamt it--but I was completely persuaded--Miss Smith,
you walk as if you were tired.  You will not be sorry to find
"What is this?--What is this?" cried Mr. Weston, "about Perry
and a carriage?  Is Perry going to set up his carriage, Frank? 
I am glad he can afford it.  You had it from himself, had you?"
"No, sir," replied his son, laughing, "I seem to have had it
from nobody.--Very odd!--I really was persuaded of Mrs. Weston's
having mentioned it in one of her letters to Enscombe, many weeks ago,
with all these particulars--but as she declares she never heard
a syllable of it before, of course it must have been a dream.  I am
a great dreamer.  I dream of every body at Highbury when I am away--
and when I have gone through my particular friends, then I begin
"It is odd though," observed his father, "that you should have had such
a regular connected dream about people whom it was not very likely you
should be thinking of at Enscombe.  Perry's setting up his carriage!
and his wife's persuading him to it, out of care for his health--
just what will happen, I have no doubt, some time or other;
only a little premature.  What an air of probability sometimes
runs through a dream!  And at others, what a heap of absurdities
it is!  Well, Frank, your dream certainly shews that Highbury is in
your thoughts when you are absent.  Emma, you are a great dreamer,
Emma was out of hearing.  She had hurried on before her guests
to prepare her father for their appearance, and was beyond the reach
"Why, to own the truth," cried Miss Bates, who had been trying in vain
to be heard the last two minutes, "if I must speak on this subject,
there is no denying that Mr. Frank Churchill might have--I do not
mean to say that he did not dream it--I am sure I have sometimes
the oddest dreams in the world--but if I am questioned about it,
I must acknowledge that there was such an idea last spring;
for Mrs. Perry herself mentioned it to my mother, and the Coles
knew of it as well as ourselves--but it was quite a secret,
known to nobody else, and only thought of about three days. 
Mrs. Perry was very anxious that he should have a carriage, and came
to my mother in great spirits one morning because she thought she
had prevailed.  Jane, don't you remember grandmama's telling us
of it when we got home?  I forget where we had been walking to--
very likely to Randalls; yes, I think it was to Randalls. 
Mrs. Perry was always particularly fond of my mother--indeed I do
not know who is not--and she had mentioned it to her in confidence;
she had no objection to her telling us, of course, but it was not
to go beyond:  and, from that day to this, I never mentioned it
to a soul that I know of.  At the same time, I will not positively
answer for my having never dropt a hint, because I know I do
sometimes pop out a thing before I am aware.  I am a talker,
you know; I am rather a talker; and now and then I have let a thing
escape me which I should not.  I am not like Jane; I wish I were. 
I will answer for it she never betrayed the least thing in the world. 
Where is she?--Oh! just behind.  Perfectly remember Mrs. Perry's coming.--
They were entering the hall.  Mr. Knightley's eyes had preceded
Miss Bates's in a glance at Jane.  From Frank Churchill's face,
where he thought he saw confusion suppressed or laughed away,
he had involuntarily turned to hers; but she was indeed behind,
and too busy with her shawl.  Mr. Weston had walked in.  The two
other gentlemen waited at the door to let her pass.  Mr. Knightley
suspected in Frank Churchill the determination of catching her eye--
he seemed watching her intently--in vain, however, if it were so--
Jane passed between them into the hall, and looked at neither.
There was no time for farther remark or explanation.  The dream must
be borne with, and Mr. Knightley must take his seat with the rest round
the large modern circular table which Emma had introduced at Hartfield,
and which none but Emma could have had power to place there and
persuade her father to use, instead of the small-sized Pembroke,
on which two of his daily meals had, for forty years been crowded. 
Tea passed pleasantly, and nobody seemed in a hurry to move.
"Miss Woodhouse," said Frank Churchill, after examining a table
behind him, which he could reach as he sat, "have your nephews taken
away their alphabets--their box of letters?  It used to stand here. 
Where is it?  This is a sort of dull-looking evening, that ought
to be treated rather as winter than summer.  We had great amusement
with those letters one morning.  I want to puzzle you again."
Emma was pleased with the thought; and producing the box, the table
was quickly scattered over with alphabets, which no one seemed so much
disposed to employ as their two selves.  They were rapidly forming
words for each other, or for any body else who would be puzzled. 
The quietness of the game made it particularly eligible for
Mr. Woodhouse, who had often been distressed by the more animated sort,
which Mr. Weston had occasionally introduced, and who now sat happily
occupied in lamenting, with tender melancholy, over the departure
of the "poor little boys," or in fondly pointing out, as he took
up any stray letter near him, how beautifully Emma had written it.
Frank Churchill placed a word before Miss Fairfax.  She gave
a slight glance round the table, and applied herself to it. 
Frank was next to Emma, Jane opposite to them--and Mr. Knightley
so placed as to see them all; and it was his object to see as much
as he could, with as little apparent observation.  The word
was discovered, and with a faint smile pushed away.  If meant
to be immediately mixed with the others, and buried from sight,
she should have looked on the table instead of looking just across,
for it was not mixed; and Harriet, eager after every fresh word,
and finding out none, directly took it up, and fell to work. 
She was sitting by Mr. Knightley, and turned to him for help. 
The word was blunder; and as Harriet exultingly proclaimed it,
there was a blush on Jane's cheek which gave it a meaning not
otherwise ostensible.  Mr. Knightley connected it with the dream;
but how it could all be, was beyond his comprehension. 
How the delicacy, the discretion of his favourite could have been
so lain asleep!  He feared there must be some decided involvement. 
Disingenuousness and double dealing seemed to meet him at every turn. 
These letters were but the vehicle for gallantry and trick. 
It was a child's play, chosen to conceal a deeper game on Frank
With great indignation did he continue to observe him; with great
alarm and distrust, to observe also his two blinded companions. 
He saw a short word prepared for Emma, and given to her with a look
sly and demure.  He saw that Emma had soon made it out, and found
it highly entertaining, though it was something which she judged it
proper to appear to censure; for she said, "Nonsense! for shame!" 
He heard Frank Churchill next say, with a glance towards Jane,
"I will give it to her--shall I?"--and as clearly heard Emma
opposing it with eager laughing warmth.  "No, no, you must not;
It was done however.  This gallant young man, who seemed to love
without feeling, and to recommend himself without complaisance,
directly handed over the word to Miss Fairfax, and with a particular
degree of sedate civility entreated her to study it.  Mr. Knightley's
excessive curiosity to know what this word might be, made him seize
every possible moment for darting his eye towards it, and it was
not long before he saw it to be Dixon.  Jane Fairfax's perception
seemed to accompany his; her comprehension was certainly more equal
to the covert meaning, the superior intelligence, of those five letters
so arranged.  She was evidently displeased; looked up, and seeing
herself watched, blushed more deeply than he had ever perceived her,
and saying only, "I did not know that proper names were allowed,"
pushed away the letters with even an angry spirit, and looked
resolved to be engaged by no other word that could be offered. 
Her face was averted from those who had made the attack, and turned
"Aye, very true, my dear," cried the latter, though Jane had not
spoken a word--"I was just going to say the same thing.  It is time
for us to be going indeed.  The evening is closing in, and grandmama
will be looking for us.  My dear sir, you are too obliging. 
Jane's alertness in moving, proved her as ready as her aunt
had preconceived.  She was immediately up, and wanting to quit
the table; but so many were also moving, that she could not get away;
and Mr. Knightley thought he saw another collection of letters anxiously
pushed towards her, and resolutely swept away by her unexamined. 
She was afterwards looking for her shawl--Frank Churchill was
looking also--it was growing dusk, and the room was in confusion;
and how they parted, Mr. Knightley could not tell.
He remained at Hartfield after all the rest, his thoughts full
of what he had seen; so full, that when the candles came to assist
his observations, he must--yes, he certainly must, as a friend--
an anxious friend--give Emma some hint, ask her some question. 
He could not see her in a situation of such danger, without trying to
"Pray, Emma," said he, "may I ask in what lay the great amusement,
the poignant sting of the last word given to you and Miss Fairfax? 
I saw the word, and am curious to know how it could be so very
entertaining to the one, and so very distressing to the other."
Emma was extremely confused.  She could not endure to give him the
true explanation; for though her suspicions were by no means removed,
she was really ashamed of having ever imparted them.
"Oh!" she cried in evident embarrassment, "it all meant nothing;
"The joke," he replied gravely, "seemed confined to you
He had hoped she would speak again, but she did not.  She would
rather busy herself about any thing than speak.  He sat a little
while in doubt.  A variety of evils crossed his mind.  Interference--
fruitless interference.  Emma's confusion, and the acknowledged intimacy,
seemed to declare her affection engaged.  Yet he would speak. 
He owed it to her, to risk any thing that might be involved in
an unwelcome interference, rather than her welfare; to encounter
any thing, rather than the remembrance of neglect in such a cause.
"My dear Emma," said he at last, with earnest kindness, "do you
think you perfectly understand the degree of acquaintance between
"Between Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax?  Oh! yes, perfectly.--
"Have you never at any time had reason to think that he admired her,
"Never, never!" she cried with a most open eagerness--"Never, for
the twentieth part of a moment, did such an idea occur to me. 
"I have lately imagined that I saw symptoms of attachment between them--
certain expressive looks, which I did not believe meant to be public."
"Oh! you amuse me excessively.  I am delighted to find that you
can vouchsafe to let your imagination wander--but it will not do--
very sorry to check you in your first essay--but indeed it will
not do.  There is no admiration between them, I do assure you;
and the appearances which have caught you, have arisen from some
peculiar circumstances--feelings rather of a totally different nature--
it is impossible exactly to explain:--there is a good deal of
nonsense in it--but the part which is capable of being communicated,
which is sense, is, that they are as far from any attachment or
admiration for one another, as any two beings in the world can be. 
That is, I presume it to be so on her side, and I can answer for its
being so on his.  I will answer for the gentleman's indifference."
She spoke with a confidence which staggered, with a satisfaction
which silenced, Mr. Knightley.  She was in gay spirits, and would
have prolonged the conversation, wanting to hear the particulars
of his suspicions, every look described, and all the wheres and hows
of a circumstance which highly entertained her:  but his gaiety did
not meet hers.  He found he could not be useful, and his feelings
were too much irritated for talking.  That he might not be irritated
into an absolute fever, by the fire which Mr. Woodhouse's tender
habits required almost every evening throughout the year, he soon
afterwards took a hasty leave, and walked home to the coolness
After being long fed with hopes of a speedy visit from Mr. and
Mrs. Suckling, the Highbury world were obliged to endure the mortification
of hearing that they could not possibly come till the autumn. 
No such importation of novelties could enrich their intellectual stores
at present.  In the daily interchange of news, they must be again
restricted to the other topics with which for a while the Sucklings'
coming had been united, such as the last accounts of Mrs. Churchill,
whose health seemed every day to supply a different report,
and the situation of Mrs. Weston, whose happiness it was to be hoped
might eventually be as much increased by the arrival of a child,
as that of all her neighbours was by the approach of it.
Mrs. Elton was very much disappointed.  It was the delay of a great
deal of pleasure and parade.  Her introductions and recommendations
must all wait, and every projected party be still only talked of. 
So she thought at first;--but a little consideration convinced
her that every thing need not be put off.  Why should not they
explore to Box Hill though the Sucklings did not come?  They could
go there again with them in the autumn.  It was settled that they
should go to Box Hill.  That there was to be such a party had been
long generally known:  it had even given the idea of another. 
Emma had never been to Box Hill; she wished to see what every body
found so well worth seeing, and she and Mr. Weston had agreed
to chuse some fine morning and drive thither.  Two or three more
of the chosen only were to be admitted to join them, and it was to
be done in a quiet, unpretending, elegant way, infinitely superior
to the bustle and preparation, the regular eating and drinking,
and picnic parade of the Eltons and the Sucklings.
This was so very well understood between them, that Emma could
not but feel some surprise, and a little displeasure, on hearing
from Mr. Weston that he had been proposing to Mrs. Elton, as her
brother and sister had failed her, that the two parties should unite,
and go together; and that as Mrs. Elton had very readily acceded
to it, so it was to be, if she had no objection.  Now, as her
objection was nothing but her very great dislike of Mrs. Elton,
of which Mr. Weston must already be perfectly aware, it was not worth
bringing forward again:--it could not be done without a reproof
to him, which would be giving pain to his wife; and she found
herself therefore obliged to consent to an arrangement which she
would have done a great deal to avoid; an arrangement which would
probably expose her even to the degradation of being said to be of
Mrs. Elton's party!  Every feeling was offended; and the forbearance
of her outward submission left a heavy arrear due of secret severity
in her reflections on the unmanageable goodwill of Mr. Weston's temper.
"I am glad you approve of what I have done," said he very comfortably. 
"But I thought you would.  Such schemes as these are nothing
without numbers.  One cannot have too large a party.  A large party
secures its own amusement.  And she is a good-natured woman after all. 
Emma denied none of it aloud, and agreed to none of it in private.
It was now the middle of June, and the weather fine; and Mrs. Elton
was growing impatient to name the day, and settle with Mr. Weston
as to pigeon-pies and cold lamb, when a lame carriage-horse threw
every thing into sad uncertainty.  It might be weeks, it might be
only a few days, before the horse were useable; but no preparations
could be ventured on, and it was all melancholy stagnation. 
Mrs. Elton's resources were inadequate to such an attack.
"Is not this most vexations, Knightley?" she cried.--"And such weather
for exploring!--These delays and disappointments are quite odious. 
What are we to do?--The year will wear away at this rate,
and nothing done.  Before this time last year I assure you we had
had a delightful exploring party from Maple Grove to Kings Weston."
"You had better explore to Donwell," replied Mr. Knightley. 
"That may be done without horses.  Come, and eat my strawberries. 
If Mr. Knightley did not begin seriously, he was obliged to proceed so,
for his proposal was caught at with delight; and the "Oh!  I should
like it of all things," was not plainer in words than manner. 
Donwell was famous for its strawberry-beds, which seemed a plea for
the invitation:  but no plea was necessary; cabbage-beds would have
been enough to tempt the lady, who only wanted to be going somewhere. 
She promised him again and again to come--much oftener than
he doubted--and was extremely gratified by such a proof of intimacy,
such a distinguishing compliment as she chose to consider it.
"You may depend upon me," said she.  "I certainly will come. 
Name your day, and I will come.  You will allow me to bring
"I cannot name a day," said he, "till I have spoken to some others
"Oh! leave all that to me.  Only give me a carte-blanche.--I am
Lady Patroness, you know.  It is my party.  I will bring friends
"I hope you will bring Elton," said he:  "but I will not trouble
"Oh! now you are looking very sly.  But consider--you need not be afraid
of delegating power to me.  I am no young lady on her preferment. 
Married women, you know, may be safely authorised.  It is my party. 
"No,"--he calmly replied,--"there is but one married woman in the world
whom I can ever allow to invite what guests she pleases to Donwell,
"--Mrs. Weston, I suppose," interrupted Mrs. Elton, rather mortified.
"No--Mrs. Knightley;--and till she is in being, I will manage
"Ah! you are an odd creature!" she cried, satisfied to have no
one preferred to herself.--"You are a humourist, and may say what
you like.  Quite a humourist.  Well, I shall bring Jane with me--
Jane and her aunt.--The rest I leave to you.  I have no objections
at all to meeting the Hartfield family.  Don't scruple.  I know
"You certainly will meet them if I can prevail; and I shall call
"That's quite unnecessary; I see Jane every day:--but as you like. 
It is to be a morning scheme, you know, Knightley; quite a simple thing. 
I shall wear a large bonnet, and bring one of my little baskets
hanging on my arm.  Here,--probably this basket with pink ribbon. 
Nothing can be more simple, you see.  And Jane will have such another. 
There is to be no form or parade--a sort of gipsy party.  We are
to walk about your gardens, and gather the strawberries ourselves,
and sit under trees;--and whatever else you may like to provide,
it is to be all out of doors--a table spread in the shade, you know. 
Every thing as natural and simple as possible.  Is not that your idea?"
"Not quite.  My idea of the simple and the natural will be to have
the table spread in the dining-room. The nature and the simplicity
of gentlemen and ladies, with their servants and furniture, I think
is best observed by meals within doors.  When you are tired of eating
strawberries in the garden, there shall be cold meat in the house."
"Well--as you please; only don't have a great set out.  And, by the bye,
can I or my housekeeper be of any use to you with our opinion?--
Pray be sincere, Knightley.  If you wish me to talk to Mrs. Hodges,
"Well--but if any difficulties should arise, my housekeeper
"I will answer for it, that mine thinks herself full as clever,
"I wish we had a donkey.  The thing would be for us all to come
on donkeys, Jane, Miss Bates, and me--and my caro sposo walking by. 
I really must talk to him about purchasing a donkey.  In a country
life I conceive it to be a sort of necessary; for, let a woman have
ever so many resources, it is not possible for her to be always shut
up at home;--and very long walks, you know--in summer there is dust,
"You will not find either, between Donwell and Highbury. 
Donwell Lane is never dusty, and now it is perfectly dry.  Come on
a donkey, however, if you prefer it.  You can borrow Mrs. Cole's.
I would wish every thing to be as much to your taste as possible."
"That I am sure you would.  Indeed I do you justice, my good friend. 
Under that peculiar sort of dry, blunt manner, I know you have the
warmest heart.  As I tell Mr. E., you are a thorough humourist.--
Yes, believe me, Knightley, I am fully sensible of your attention
to me in the whole of this scheme.  You have hit upon the very thing
Mr. Knightley had another reason for avoiding a table in the shade. 
He wished to persuade Mr. Woodhouse, as well as Emma, to join the party;
and he knew that to have any of them sitting down out of doors
to eat would inevitably make him ill.  Mr. Woodhouse must not,
under the specious pretence of a morning drive, and an hour or two
He was invited on good faith.  No lurking horrors were to upbraid
him for his easy credulity.  He did consent.  He had not been
at Donwell for two years.  "Some very fine morning, he, and Emma,
and Harriet, could go very well; and he could sit still with
Mrs. Weston, while the dear girls walked about the gardens. 
He did not suppose they could be damp now, in the middle of
the day.  He should like to see the old house again exceedingly,
and should be very happy to meet Mr. and Mrs. Elton, and any other
of his neighbours.--He could not see any objection at all to his,
and Emma's, and Harriet's going there some very fine morning. 
He thought it very well done of Mr. Knightley to invite them--
very kind and sensible--much cleverer than dining out.--He was not
Mr. Knightley was fortunate in every body's most ready concurrence. 
The invitation was everywhere so well received, that it seemed as if,
like Mrs. Elton, they were all taking the scheme as a particular
compliment to themselves.--Emma and Harriet professed very high
expectations of pleasure from it; and Mr. Weston, unasked,
promised to get Frank over to join them, if possible; a proof
of approbation and gratitude which could have been dispensed with.--
Mr. Knightley was then obliged to say that he should be glad
to see him; and Mr. Weston engaged to lose no time in writing,
In the meanwhile the lame horse recovered so fast, that the party
to Box Hill was again under happy consideration; and at last Donwell
was settled for one day, and Box Hill for the next,--the weather
Under a bright mid-day sun, at almost Midsummer, Mr. Woodhouse
was safely conveyed in his carriage, with one window down,
to partake of this al-fresco party; and in one of the most
comfortable rooms in the Abbey, especially prepared for him by a
fire all the morning, he was happily placed, quite at his ease,
ready to talk with pleasure of what had been achieved, and advise
every body to come and sit down, and not to heat themselves.--
Mrs. Weston, who seemed to have walked there on purpose to be tired,
and sit all the time with him, remained, when all the others
were invited or persuaded out, his patient listener and sympathiser.
It was so long since Emma had been at the Abbey, that as soon as she
was satisfied of her father's comfort, she was glad to leave him,
and look around her; eager to refresh and correct her memory with
more particular observation, more exact understanding of a house
and grounds which must ever be so interesting to her and all her family.
She felt all the honest pride and complacency which her alliance
with the present and future proprietor could fairly warrant,
as she viewed the respectable size and style of the building,
its suitable, becoming, characteristic situation, low and sheltered--
its ample gardens stretching down to meadows washed by a stream,
of which the Abbey, with all the old neglect of prospect,
had scarcely a sight--and its abundance of timber in rows and avenues,
which neither fashion nor extravagance had rooted up.--The house
was larger than Hartfield, and totally unlike it, covering a good
deal of ground, rambling and irregular, with many comfortable,
and one or two handsome rooms.--It was just what it ought to be,
and it looked what it was--and Emma felt an increasing respect
for it, as the residence of a family of such true gentility,
untainted in blood and understanding.--Some faults of temper John
Knightley had; but Isabella had connected herself unexceptionably. 
She had given them neither men, nor names, nor places, that could
raise a blush.  These were pleasant feelings, and she walked about
and indulged them till it was necessary to do as the others did,
and collect round the strawberry-beds.--The whole party were assembled,
excepting Frank Churchill, who was expected every moment from Richmond;
and Mrs. Elton, in all her apparatus of happiness, her large bonnet
and her basket, was very ready to lead the way in gathering,
accepting, or talking--strawberries, and only strawberries,
could now be thought or spoken of.--"The best fruit in England--
every body's favourite--always wholesome.--These the finest beds
and finest sorts.--Delightful to gather for one's self--the only way
of really enjoying them.--Morning decidedly the best time--never tired--
every sort good--hautboy infinitely superior--no comparison--
the others hardly eatable--hautboys very scarce--Chili preferred--
white wood finest flavour of all--price of strawberries in London--
abundance about Bristol--Maple Grove--cultivation--beds when to
be renewed--gardeners thinking exactly different--no general rule--
gardeners never to be put out of their way--delicious fruit--
only too rich to be eaten much of--inferior to cherries--
currants more refreshing--only objection to gathering strawberries
the stooping--glaring sun--tired to death--could bear it no longer--
Such, for half an hour, was the conversation--interrupted only
once by Mrs. Weston, who came out, in her solicitude after her
son-in-law, to inquire if he were come--and she was a little uneasy.--
Seats tolerably in the shade were found; and now Emma was obliged
to overhear what Mrs. Elton and Jane Fairfax were talking of.--
A situation, a most desirable situation, was in question.  Mrs. Elton
had received notice of it that morning, and was in raptures. 
It was not with Mrs. Suckling, it was not with Mrs. Bragge,
but in felicity and splendour it fell short only of them:  it was
with a cousin of Mrs. Bragge, an acquaintance of Mrs. Suckling,
a lady known at Maple Grove.  Delightful, charming, superior,
first circles, spheres, lines, ranks, every thing--and Mrs. Elton
was wild to have the offer closed with immediately.--On her side,
all was warmth, energy, and triumph--and she positively refused
to take her friend's negative, though Miss Fairfax continued
to assure her that she would not at present engage in any thing,
repeating the same motives which she had been heard to urge before.--
Still Mrs. Elton insisted on being authorised to write an acquiescence
by the morrow's post.--How Jane could bear it at all, was astonishing
to Emma.--She did look vexed, she did speak pointedly--and at last,
with a decision of action unusual to her, proposed a removal.--
"Should not they walk?  Would not Mr. Knightley shew them the gardens--
all the gardens?--She wished to see the whole extent."--The pertinacity
It was hot; and after walking some time over the gardens in a scattered,
dispersed way, scarcely any three together, they insensibly
followed one another to the delicious shade of a broad short
avenue of limes, which stretching beyond the garden at an equal
distance from the river, seemed the finish of the pleasure grounds.--
It led to nothing; nothing but a view at the end over a low stone
wall with high pillars, which seemed intended, in their erection,
to give the appearance of an approach to the house, which never had
been there.  Disputable, however, as might be the taste of such
a termination, it was in itself a charming walk, and the view
which closed it extremely pretty.--The considerable slope, at nearly
the foot of which the Abbey stood, gradually acquired a steeper
form beyond its grounds; and at half a mile distant was a bank
of considerable abruptness and grandeur, well clothed with wood;--
and at the bottom of this bank, favourably placed and sheltered,
rose the Abbey Mill Farm, with meadows in front, and the river
It was a sweet view--sweet to the eye and the mind.  English verdure,
English culture, English comfort, seen under a sun bright,
In this walk Emma and Mr. Weston found all the others assembled;
and towards this view she immediately perceived Mr. Knightley
and Harriet distinct from the rest, quietly leading the way. 
Mr. Knightley and Harriet!--It was an odd tete-a-tete; but she was
glad to see it.--There had been a time when he would have scorned
her as a companion, and turned from her with little ceremony. 
Now they seemed in pleasant conversation.  There had been a time
also when Emma would have been sorry to see Harriet in a spot
so favourable for the Abbey Mill Farm; but now she feared it not. 
It might be safely viewed with all its appendages of prosperity
and beauty, its rich pastures, spreading flocks, orchard in blossom,
and light column of smoke ascending.--She joined them at the wall,
and found them more engaged in talking than in looking around. 
He was giving Harriet information as to modes of agriculture, etc. 
and Emma received a smile which seemed to say, "These are my
own concerns.  I have a right to talk on such subjects, without being
suspected of introducing Robert Martin."--She did not suspect him. 
It was too old a story.--Robert Martin had probably ceased to think
of Harriet.--They took a few turns together along the walk.--The shade
was most refreshing, and Emma found it the pleasantest part of
The next remove was to the house; they must all go in and eat;--
and they were all seated and busy, and still Frank Churchill did
not come.  Mrs. Weston looked, and looked in vain.  His father would
not own himself uneasy, and laughed at her fears; but she could
not be cured of wishing that he would part with his black mare. 
He had expressed himself as to coming, with more than common certainty. 
"His aunt was so much better, that he had not a doubt of getting
over to them."--Mrs. Churchill's state, however, as many were ready
to remind her, was liable to such sudden variation as might disappoint
her nephew in the most reasonable dependence--and Mrs. Weston
was at last persuaded to believe, or to say, that it must be
by some attack of Mrs. Churchill that he was prevented coming.--
Emma looked at Harriet while the point was under consideration;
The cold repast was over, and the party were to go out once more
to see what had not yet been seen, the old Abbey fish-ponds;
perhaps get as far as the clover, which was to be begun cutting
on the morrow, or, at any rate, have the pleasure of being hot,
and growing cool again.--Mr. Woodhouse, who had already taken
his little round in the highest part of the gardens, where no
damps from the river were imagined even by him, stirred no more;
and his daughter resolved to remain with him, that Mrs. Weston
might be persuaded away by her husband to the exercise and variety
Mr. Knightley had done all in his power for Mr. Woodhouse's
entertainment.  Books of engravings, drawers of medals, cameos,
corals, shells, and every other family collection within his cabinets,
had been prepared for his old friend, to while away the morning;
and the kindness had perfectly answered.  Mr. Woodhouse had been
exceedingly well amused.  Mrs. Weston had been shewing them all to him,
and now he would shew them all to Emma;--fortunate in having no other
resemblance to a child, than in a total want of taste for what he saw,
for he was slow, constant, and methodical.--Before this second looking
over was begun, however, Emma walked into the hall for the sake
of a few moments' free observation of the entrance and ground-plot
of the house--and was hardly there, when Jane Fairfax appeared,
coming quickly in from the garden, and with a look of escape.--
Little expecting to meet Miss Woodhouse so soon, there was a start
at first; but Miss Woodhouse was the very person she was in quest of.
"Will you be so kind," said she, "when I am missed, as to say
that I am gone home?--I am going this moment.--My aunt is not aware
how late it is, nor how long we have been absent--but I am sure we
shall be wanted, and I am determined to go directly.--I have said
nothing about it to any body.  It would only be giving trouble
and distress.  Some are gone to the ponds, and some to the lime walk. 
Till they all come in I shall not be missed; and when they do,
will you have the goodness to say that I am gone?"
"Certainly, if you wish it;--but you are not going to walk
"Yes--what should hurt me?--I walk fast.  I shall be at home
"But it is too far, indeed it is, to be walking quite alone. 
Let my father's servant go with you.--Let me order the carriage. 
"Thank you, thank you--but on no account.--I would rather walk.--
And for me to be afraid of walking alone!--I, who may so soon have
She spoke with great agitation; and Emma very feelingly replied,
"That can be no reason for your being exposed to danger now. 
I must order the carriage.  The heat even would be danger.--You are
"I am,"--she answered--"I am fatigued; but it is not the sort
of fatigue--quick walking will refresh me.--Miss Woodhouse, we all
know at times what it is to be wearied in spirits.  Mine, I confess,
are exhausted.  The greatest kindness you can shew me, will be to let
me have my own way, and only say that I am gone when it is necessary."
Emma had not another word to oppose.  She saw it all; and entering
into her feelings, promoted her quitting the house immediately,
and watched her safely off with the zeal of a friend.  Her parting
look was grateful--and her parting words, "Oh!  Miss Woodhouse,
the comfort of being sometimes alone!"--seemed to burst from
an overcharged heart, and to describe somewhat of the continual
endurance to be practised by her, even towards some of those who
"Such a home, indeed! such an aunt!" said Emma, as she turned back
into the hall again.  "I do pity you.  And the more sensibility
you betray of their just horrors, the more I shall like you."
Jane had not been gone a quarter of an hour, and they had only
accomplished some views of St. Mark's Place, Venice, when Frank
Churchill entered the room.  Emma had not been thinking of him,
she had forgotten to think of him--but she was very glad to see him. 
Mrs. Weston would be at ease.  The black mare was blameless;
they were right who had named Mrs. Churchill as the cause. 
He had been detained by a temporary increase of illness in her;
a nervous seizure, which had lasted some hours--and he had quite given
up every thought of coming, till very late;--and had he known how hot
a ride he should have, and how late, with all his hurry, he must be,
he believed he should not have come at all.  The heat was excessive;
he had never suffered any thing like it--almost wished he had staid
at home--nothing killed him like heat--he could bear any degree of cold,
etc., but heat was intolerable--and he sat down, at the greatest
possible distance from the slight remains of Mr. Woodhouse's fire,
"You will soon be cooler, if you sit still," said Emma.
"As soon as I am cooler I shall go back again.  I could very
ill be spared--but such a point had been made of my coming! 
You will all be going soon I suppose; the whole party breaking up. 
I met one as I came--Madness in such weather!--absolute madness!"
Emma listened, and looked, and soon perceived that Frank Churchill's
state might be best defined by the expressive phrase of being
out of humour.  Some people were always cross when they were hot. 
Such might be his constitution; and as she knew that eating
and drinking were often the cure of such incidental complaints,
she recommended his taking some refreshment; he would find abundance
of every thing in the dining-room--and she humanely pointed out
"No--he should not eat.  He was not hungry; it would only make
him hotter."  In two minutes, however, he relented in his own favour;
and muttering something about spruce-beer, walked off.  Emma returned
all her attention to her father, saying in secret--
"I am glad I have done being in love with him.  I should not like a
man who is so soon discomposed by a hot morning.  Harriet's sweet
He was gone long enough to have had a very comfortable meal, and came
back all the better--grown quite cool--and, with good manners,
like himself--able to draw a chair close to them, take an interest
in their employment; and regret, in a reasonable way, that he
should be so late.  He was not in his best spirits, but seemed
trying to improve them; and, at last, made himself talk nonsense
very agreeably.  They were looking over views in Swisserland.
"As soon as my aunt gets well, I shall go abroad," said he. 
"I shall never be easy till I have seen some of these places. 
You will have my sketches, some time or other, to look at--or my tour
to read--or my poem.  I shall do something to expose myself."
"That may be--but not by sketches in Swisserland.  You will
never go to Swisserland.  Your uncle and aunt will never allow
"They may be induced to go too.  A warm climate may be prescribed
for her.  I have more than half an expectation of our all going abroad. 
I assure you I have.  I feel a strong persuasion, this morning,
that I shall soon be abroad.  I ought to travel.  I am tired
of doing nothing.  I want a change.  I am serious, Miss Woodhouse,
whatever your penetrating eyes may fancy--I am sick of England--
"You are sick of prosperity and indulgence.  Cannot you invent
a few hardships for yourself, and be contented to stay?"
"I sick of prosperity and indulgence!  You are quite mistaken. 
I do not look upon myself as either prosperous or indulged.  I am
thwarted in every thing material.  I do not consider myself at all
"You are not quite so miserable, though, as when you first came. 
Go and eat and drink a little more, and you will do very well. 
Another slice of cold meat, another draught of Madeira and water,
will make you nearly on a par with the rest of us."
"No--I shall not stir.  I shall sit by you.  You are my best cure."
"We are going to Box Hill to-morrow;--you will join us. 
It is not Swisserland, but it will be something for a young
man so much in want of a change.  You will stay, and go with us?"
"No, certainly not; I shall go home in the cool of the evening."
"But you may come again in the cool of to-morrow morning."
"No--It will not be worth while.  If I come, I shall be cross."
"But if I do, I shall be crosser still.  I can never bear to think
"These are difficulties which you must settle for yourself. 
Chuse your own degree of crossness.  I shall press you no more."
The rest of the party were now returning, and all were soon collected. 
With some there was great joy at the sight of Frank Churchill;
others took it very composedly; but there was a very general distress
and disturbance on Miss Fairfax's disappearance being explained. 
That it was time for every body to go, concluded the subject; and with
a short final arrangement for the next day's scheme, they parted. 
Frank Churchill's little inclination to exclude himself increased
"Well;--if you wish me to stay and join the party, I will."
She smiled her acceptance; and nothing less than a summons from
Richmond was to take him back before the following evening.
They had a very fine day for Box Hill; and all the other outward
circumstances of arrangement, accommodation, and punctuality,
were in favour of a pleasant party.  Mr. Weston directed the whole,
officiating safely between Hartfield and the Vicarage, and every
body was in good time.  Emma and Harriet went together; Miss Bates
and her niece, with the Eltons; the gentlemen on horseback. 
Mrs. Weston remained with Mr. Woodhouse.  Nothing was wanting
but to be happy when they got there.  Seven miles were travelled
in expectation of enjoyment, and every body had a burst of admiration
on first arriving; but in the general amount of the day there
was deficiency.  There was a languor, a want of spirits, a want of union,
which could not be got over.  They separated too much into parties. 
The Eltons walked together; Mr. Knightley took charge of Miss
Bates and Jane; and Emma and Harriet belonged to Frank Churchill. 
And Mr. Weston tried, in vain, to make them harmonise better.  It seemed
at first an accidental division, but it never materially varied. 
Mr. and Mrs. Elton, indeed, shewed no unwillingness to mix,
and be as agreeable as they could; but during the two whole hours
that were spent on the hill, there seemed a principle of separation,
between the other parties, too strong for any fine prospects, or any
cold collation, or any cheerful Mr. Weston, to remove.
At first it was downright dulness to Emma.  She had never seen Frank
Churchill so silent and stupid.  He said nothing worth hearing--
looked without seeing--admired without intelligence--listened without
knowing what she said.  While he was so dull, it was no wonder that
Harriet should be dull likewise; and they were both insufferable.
When they all sat down it was better; to her taste a great deal better,
for Frank Churchill grew talkative and gay, making her his first object. 
Every distinguishing attention that could be paid, was paid to her. 
To amuse her, and be agreeable in her eyes, seemed all that he
cared for--and Emma, glad to be enlivened, not sorry to be flattered,
was gay and easy too, and gave him all the friendly encouragement,
the admission to be gallant, which she had ever given in the first
and most animating period of their acquaintance; but which now,
in her own estimation, meant nothing, though in the judgment of most
people looking on it must have had such an appearance as no English
word but flirtation could very well describe.  "Mr. Frank Churchill
and Miss Woodhouse flirted together excessively."  They were laying
themselves open to that very phrase--and to having it sent off
in a letter to Maple Grove by one lady, to Ireland by another. 
Not that Emma was gay and thoughtless from any real felicity;
it was rather because she felt less happy than she had expected. 
She laughed because she was disappointed; and though she liked him
for his attentions, and thought them all, whether in friendship,
admiration, or playfulness, extremely judicious, they were not winning
back her heart.  She still intended him for her friend.
"How much I am obliged to you," said he, "for telling me to come to-day!--
If it had not been for you, I should certainly have lost all the
happiness of this party.  I had quite determined to go away again."
"Yes, you were very cross; and I do not know what about,
except that you were too late for the best strawberries. 
I was a kinder friend than you deserved.  But you were humble. 
"Don't say I was cross.  I was fatigued.  The heat overcame me."
"Not to my feelings.  I am perfectly comfortable to-day."
"You are comfortable because you are under command."
"Perhaps I intended you to say so, but I meant self-command. You had,
somehow or other, broken bounds yesterday, and run away from your
own management; but to-day you are got back again--and as I cannot
be always with you, it is best to believe your temper under your
"It comes to the same thing.  I can have no self-command without
a motive.  You order me, whether you speak or not.  And you can
"Dating from three o'clock yesterday.  My perpetual influence
could not begin earlier, or you would not have been so much
"Three o'clock yesterday!  That is your date.  I thought I had seen
"Your gallantry is really unanswerable.  But (lowering her voice)--
nobody speaks except ourselves, and it is rather too much to be
talking nonsense for the entertainment of seven silent people."
"I say nothing of which I am ashamed," replied he, with lively impudence. 
"I saw you first in February.  Let every body on the Hill hear me if
they can.  Let my accents swell to Mickleham on one side, and Dorking
on the other.  I saw you first in February."  And then whispering--
"Our companions are excessively stupid.  What shall we do to rouse them? 
Any nonsense will serve.  They shall talk.  Ladies and gentlemen,
I am ordered by Miss Woodhouse (who, wherever she is, presides)
to say, that she desires to know what you are all thinking of?"
Some laughed, and answered good-humouredly. Miss Bates said a great deal;
Mrs. Elton swelled at the idea of Miss Woodhouse's presiding;
"Is Miss Woodhouse sure that she would like to hear what we are
"Oh! no, no"--cried Emma, laughing as carelessly as she could--
"Upon no account in the world.  It is the very last thing I
would stand the brunt of just now.  Let me hear any thing rather
than what you are all thinking of.  I will not say quite all. 
There are one or two, perhaps, (glancing at Mr. Weston and Harriet,)
"It is a sort of thing," cried Mrs. Elton emphatically,
"which I should not have thought myself privileged to
inquire into.  Though, perhaps, as the Chaperon of the party--
I never was in any circle--exploring parties--young ladies--married women--"
Her mutterings were chiefly to her husband; and he murmured,
"Very true, my love, very true.  Exactly so, indeed--quite unheard of--
but some ladies say any thing.  Better pass it off as a joke. 
"It will not do," whispered Frank to Emma; "they are most
of them affronted.  I will attack them with more address. 
Ladies and gentlemen--I am ordered by Miss Woodhouse to say, that she
waives her right of knowing exactly what you may all be thinking of,
and only requires something very entertaining from each of you,
in a general way.  Here are seven of you, besides myself, (who, she
is pleased to say, am very entertaining already,) and she only
demands from each of you either one thing very clever, be it prose
or verse, original or repeated--or two things moderately clever--
or three things very dull indeed, and she engages to laugh heartily
"Oh! very well," exclaimed Miss Bates, "then I need not be uneasy. 
`Three things very dull indeed.'  That will just do for me, you know. 
I shall be sure to say three dull things as soon as ever I open
my mouth, shan't I? (looking round with the most good-humoured
dependence on every body's assent)--Do not you all think I shall?"
"Ah! ma'am, but there may be a difficulty.  Pardon me--but you
will be limited as to number--only three at once."
Miss Bates, deceived by the mock ceremony of her manner, did not
immediately catch her meaning; but, when it burst on her, it could
not anger, though a slight blush shewed that it could pain her.
"Ah!--well--to be sure.  Yes, I see what she means, (turning to
Mr. Knightley,) and I will try to hold my tongue.  I must make
myself very disagreeable, or she would not have said such a thing
"I like your plan," cried Mr. Weston.  "Agreed, agreed.  I will do
my best.  I am making a conundrum.  How will a conundrum reckon?"
"Low, I am afraid, sir, very low," answered his son;--"but we shall
be indulgent--especially to any one who leads the way."
"No, no," said Emma, "it will not reckon low.  A conundrum of
Mr. Weston's shall clear him and his next neighbour.  Come, sir,
"I doubt its being very clever myself," said Mr. Weston. 
"It is too much a matter of fact, but here it is.--What two letters
of the alphabet are there, that express perfection?"
"What two letters!--express perfection!  I am sure I do not know."
"Ah! you will never guess.  You, (to Emma), I am certain, will
never guess.--I will tell you.--M. and A.--Em-ma.--Do you understand?"
Understanding and gratification came together.  It might be a very
indifferent piece of wit, but Emma found a great deal to laugh
at and enjoy in it--and so did Frank and Harriet.--It did not seem
to touch the rest of the party equally; some looked very stupid
"This explains the sort of clever thing that is wanted, and Mr. Weston
has done very well for himself; but he must have knocked up every
body else.  Perfection should not have come quite so soon."
"Oh! for myself, I protest I must be excused," said Mrs. Elton;
"I really cannot attempt--I am not at all fond of the sort of thing. 
I had an acrostic once sent to me upon my own name, which I was not
at all pleased with.  I knew who it came from.  An abominable puppy!--
You know who I mean (nodding to her husband). These kind of things
are very well at Christmas, when one is sitting round the fire;
but quite out of place, in my opinion, when one is exploring
about the country in summer.  Miss Woodhouse must excuse me. 
I am not one of those who have witty things at every body's service. 
I do not pretend to be a wit.  I have a great deal of vivacity
in my own way, but I really must be allowed to judge when to speak
and when to hold my tongue.  Pass us, if you please, Mr. Churchill. 
Pass Mr. E., Knightley, Jane, and myself.  We have nothing clever to say--
"Yes, yes, pray pass me," added her husband, with a sort of
sneering consciousness; "I have nothing to say that can entertain
Miss Woodhouse, or any other young lady.  An old married man--
"With all my heart.  I am really tired of exploring so long
Jane declined it, however, and the husband and wife walked off. 
"Happy couple!" said Frank Churchill, as soon as they were out
of hearing:--"How well they suit one another!--Very lucky--marrying as
they did, upon an acquaintance formed only in a public place!--They only
knew each other, I think, a few weeks in Bath!  Peculiarly lucky!--
for as to any real knowledge of a person's disposition that Bath,
or any public place, can give--it is all nothing; there can be
no knowledge.  It is only by seeing women in their own homes,
among their own set, just as they always are, that you can form
any just judgment.  Short of that, it is all guess and luck--
and will generally be ill-luck. How many a man has committed himself
on a short acquaintance, and rued it all the rest of his life!"
Miss Fairfax, who had seldom spoken before, except among her
"Such things do occur, undoubtedly."--She was stopped by a cough. 
"You were speaking," said he, gravely.  She recovered her voice.
"I was only going to observe, that though such unfortunate circumstances
do sometimes occur both to men and women, I cannot imagine them
to be very frequent.  A hasty and imprudent attachment may arise--
but there is generally time to recover from it afterwards.  I would
be understood to mean, that it can be only weak, irresolute characters,
(whose happiness must be always at the mercy of chance,)
who will suffer an unfortunate acquaintance to be an inconvenience,
He made no answer; merely looked, and bowed in submission; and soon
"Well, I have so little confidence in my own judgment, that whenever
I marry, I hope some body will chuse my wife for me.  Will you?
(turning to Emma.) Will you chuse a wife for me?--I am sure I
should like any body fixed on by you.  You provide for the family,
you know, (with a smile at his father). Find some body for me. 
"Very well.  I undertake the commission.  You shall have a charming wife."
"She must be very lively, and have hazle eyes.  I care for nothing else. 
I shall go abroad for a couple of years--and when I return,
Emma was in no danger of forgetting.  It was a commission to touch every
favourite feeling.  Would not Harriet be the very creature described? 
Hazle eyes excepted, two years more might make her all that he wished. 
He might even have Harriet in his thoughts at the moment;
who could say?  Referring the education to her seemed to imply it.
"Now, ma'am," said Jane to her aunt, "shall we join Mrs. Elton?"
"If you please, my dear.  With all my heart.  I am quite ready. 
I was ready to have gone with her, but this will do just as well. 
We shall soon overtake her.  There she is--no, that's somebody else. 
That's one of the ladies in the Irish car party, not at all like her.--
They walked off, followed in half a minute by Mr. Knightley. 
Mr. Weston, his son, Emma, and Harriet, only remained; and the young
man's spirits now rose to a pitch almost unpleasant.  Even Emma grew
tired at last of flattery and merriment, and wished herself rather
walking quietly about with any of the others, or sitting almost alone,
and quite unattended to, in tranquil observation of the beautiful
views beneath her.  The appearance of the servants looking out
for them to give notice of the carriages was a joyful sight;
and even the bustle of collecting and preparing to depart,
and the solicitude of Mrs. Elton to have her carriage first,
were gladly endured, in the prospect of the quiet drive home which was
to close the very questionable enjoyments of this day of pleasure. 
Such another scheme, composed of so many ill-assorted people,
While waiting for the carriage, she found Mr. Knightley by her side. 
He looked around, as if to see that no one were near, and then said,
"Emma, I must once more speak to you as I have been used to do: 
a privilege rather endured than allowed, perhaps, but I must still
use it.  I cannot see you acting wrong, without a remonstrance. 
How could you be so unfeeling to Miss Bates?  How could you be so
insolent in your wit to a woman of her character, age, and situation?--
Emma recollected, blushed, was sorry, but tried to laugh it off.
"Nay, how could I help saying what I did?--Nobody could have helped it. 
It was not so very bad.  I dare say she did not understand me."
"I assure you she did.  She felt your full meaning.  She has talked
of it since.  I wish you could have heard how she talked of it--
with what candour and generosity.  I wish you could have heard her
honouring your forbearance, in being able to pay her such attentions,
as she was for ever receiving from yourself and your father,
"Oh!" cried Emma, "I know there is not a better creature in the world: 
but you must allow, that what is good and what is ridiculous are
"They are blended," said he, "I acknowledge; and, were she prosperous,
I could allow much for the occasional prevalence of the ridiculous
over the good.  Were she a woman of fortune, I would leave every
harmless absurdity to take its chance, I would not quarrel with you
for any liberties of manner.  Were she your equal in situation--
but, Emma, consider how far this is from being the case.  She is poor;
she has sunk from the comforts she was born to; and, if she live
to old age, must probably sink more.  Her situation should secure
your compassion.  It was badly done, indeed!  You, whom she had known
from an infant, whom she had seen grow up from a period when her
notice was an honour, to have you now, in thoughtless spirits,
and the pride of the moment, laugh at her, humble her--and before
her niece, too--and before others, many of whom (certainly some,)
would be entirely guided by your treatment of her.--This is not
pleasant to you, Emma--and it is very far from pleasant to me;
but I must, I will,--I will tell you truths while I can;
satisfied with proving myself your friend by very faithful counsel,
and trusting that you will some time or other do me greater justice
While they talked, they were advancing towards the carriage;
it was ready; and, before she could speak again, he had handed her in. 
He had misinterpreted the feelings which had kept her face averted,
and her tongue motionless.  They were combined only of anger
against herself, mortification, and deep concern.  She had not
been able to speak; and, on entering the carriage, sunk back
for a moment overcome--then reproaching herself for having taken
no leave, making no acknowledgment, parting in apparent sullenness,
she looked out with voice and hand eager to shew a difference;
but it was just too late.  He had turned away, and the horses were
in motion.  She continued to look back, but in vain; and soon,
with what appeared unusual speed, they were half way down the hill,
and every thing left far behind.  She was vexed beyond what could
have been expressed--almost beyond what she could conceal. 
Never had she felt so agitated, mortified, grieved, at any circumstance
in her life.  She was most forcibly struck.  The truth of this
representation there was no denying.  She felt it at her heart. 
How could she have been so brutal, so cruel to Miss Bates!  How could
she have exposed herself to such ill opinion in any one she valued! 
And how suffer him to leave her without saying one word of gratitude,
Time did not compose her.  As she reflected more, she seemed
but to feel it more.  She never had been so depressed.  Happily it
was not necessary to speak.  There was only Harriet, who seemed not
in spirits herself, fagged, and very willing to be silent; and Emma
felt the tears running down her cheeks almost all the way home,
without being at any trouble to check them, extraordinary as they were.
The wretchedness of a scheme to Box Hill was in Emma's thoughts all
the evening.  How it might be considered by the rest of the party,
she could not tell.  They, in their different homes, and their different
ways, might be looking back on it with pleasure; but in her view it
was a morning more completely misspent, more totally bare of rational
satisfaction at the time, and more to be abhorred in recollection,
than any she had ever passed.  A whole evening of back-gammon with
her father, was felicity to it.  There, indeed, lay real pleasure,
for there she was giving up the sweetest hours of the twenty-four
to his comfort; and feeling that, unmerited as might be the degree
of his fond affection and confiding esteem, she could not, in her
general conduct, be open to any severe reproach.  As a daughter,
she hoped she was not without a heart.  She hoped no one could
have said to her, "How could you be so unfeeling to your father?--
I must, I will tell you truths while I can."  Miss Bates should
never again--no, never!  If attention, in future, could do away
the past, she might hope to be forgiven.  She had been often remiss,
her conscience told her so; remiss, perhaps, more in thought
than fact; scornful, ungracious.  But it should be so no more. 
In the warmth of true contrition, she would call upon her the
very next morning, and it should be the beginning, on her side,
She was just as determined when the morrow came, and went early,
that nothing might prevent her.  It was not unlikely, she thought,
that she might see Mr. Knightley in her way; or, perhaps, he might
come in while she were paying her visit.  She had no objection. 
She would not be ashamed of the appearance of the penitence, so justly
and truly hers.  Her eyes were towards Donwell as she walked, but she
"The ladies were all at home."  She had never rejoiced at the sound
before, nor ever before entered the passage, nor walked up the stairs,
with any wish of giving pleasure, but in conferring obligation,
There was a bustle on her approach; a good deal of moving and talking. 
She heard Miss Bates's voice, something was to be done in a hurry;
the maid looked frightened and awkward; hoped she would be pleased
to wait a moment, and then ushered her in too soon.  The aunt and
niece seemed both escaping into the adjoining room.  Jane she had
a distinct glimpse of, looking extremely ill; and, before the door
had shut them out, she heard Miss Bates saying, "Well, my dear,
I shall say you are laid down upon the bed, and I am sure you are
Poor old Mrs. Bates, civil and humble as usual, looked as if she
"I am afraid Jane is not very well," said she, "but I do not know;
they tell me she is well.  I dare say my daughter will be here presently,
Miss Woodhouse.  I hope you find a chair.  I wish Hetty had not gone. 
I am very little able--Have you a chair, ma'am? Do you sit where
Emma seriously hoped she would.  She had a moment's fear of Miss
Bates keeping away from her.  But Miss Bates soon came--"Very happy
and obliged"--but Emma's conscience told her that there was not the
same cheerful volubility as before--less ease of look and manner. 
A very friendly inquiry after Miss Fairfax, she hoped, might lead
the way to a return of old feelings.  The touch seemed immediate.
"Ah!  Miss Woodhouse, how kind you are!--I suppose you have heard--
and are come to give us joy.  This does not seem much like joy,
indeed, in me--(twinkling away a tear or two)--but it will be
very trying for us to part with her, after having had her so long,
and she has a dreadful headach just now, writing all the morning:--
such long letters, you know, to be written to Colonel Campbell,
and Mrs. Dixon.  `My dear,' said I, `you will blind yourself'--
for tears were in her eyes perpetually.  One cannot wonder,
one cannot wonder.  It is a great change; and though she is
amazingly fortunate--such a situation, I suppose, as no young woman
before ever met with on first going out--do not think us ungrateful,
Miss Woodhouse, for such surprising good fortune--(again dispersing
her tears)--but, poor dear soul! if you were to see what a headache
she has.  When one is in great pain, you know one cannot feel
any blessing quite as it may deserve.  She is as low as possible. 
To look at her, nobody would think how delighted and happy she
is to have secured such a situation.  You will excuse her not
coming to you--she is not able--she is gone into her own room--
I want her to lie down upon the bed.  `My dear,' said I, `I shall
say you are laid down upon the bed:'  but, however, she is not;
she is walking about the room.  But, now that she has written
her letters, she says she shall soon be well.  She will be extremely
sorry to miss seeing you, Miss Woodhouse, but your kindness will
excuse her.  You were kept waiting at the door--I was quite ashamed--
but somehow there was a little bustle--for it so happened that we
had not heard the knock, and till you were on the stairs, we did
not know any body was coming.  `It is only Mrs. Cole,' said I,
`depend upon it.  Nobody else would come so early.'  `Well,' said she,
`it must be borne some time or other, and it may as well be now.' 
But then Patty came in, and said it was you.  `Oh!' said I,
`it is Miss Woodhouse:  I am sure you will like to see her.'--
`I can see nobody,' said she; and up she got, and would go away;
and that was what made us keep you waiting--and extremely sorry
and ashamed we were.  `If you must go, my dear,' said I, `you must,
Emma was most sincerely interested.  Her heart had been long growing
kinder towards Jane; and this picture of her present sufferings acted
as a cure of every former ungenerous suspicion, and left her nothing
but pity; and the remembrance of the less just and less gentle
sensations of the past, obliged her to admit that Jane might very
naturally resolve on seeing Mrs. Cole or any other steady friend,
when she might not bear to see herself.  She spoke as she felt,
with earnest regret and solicitude--sincerely wishing that the
circumstances which she collected from Miss Bates to be now actually
determined on, might be as much for Miss Fairfax's advantage
and comfort as possible.  "It must be a severe trial to them all. 
She had understood it was to be delayed till Colonel Campbell's return."
"So very kind! " replied Miss Bates.  "But you are always kind."
There was no bearing such an "always;" and to break through her
dreadful gratitude, Emma made the direct inquiry of--
"To a Mrs. Smallridge--charming woman--most superior--to have
the charge of her three little girls--delightful children. 
Impossible that any situation could be more replete with comfort;
if we except, perhaps, Mrs. Suckling's own family, and Mrs. Bragge's;
but Mrs. Smallridge is intimate with both, and in the very
same neighbourhood:--lives only four miles from Maple Grove. 
"Mrs. Elton, I suppose, has been the person to whom Miss Fairfax owes--"
"Yes, our good Mrs. Elton.  The most indefatigable, true friend. 
She would not take a denial.  She would not let Jane say, `No;' for
when Jane first heard of it, (it was the day before yesterday,
the very morning we were at Donwell,) when Jane first heard of it,
she was quite decided against accepting the offer, and for the
reasons you mention; exactly as you say, she had made up her mind
to close with nothing till Colonel Campbell's return, and nothing
should induce her to enter into any engagement at present--and so she
told Mrs. Elton over and over again--and I am sure I had no more
idea that she would change her mind!--but that good Mrs. Elton,
whose judgment never fails her, saw farther than I did.  It is not
every body that would have stood out in such a kind way as she did,
and refuse to take Jane's answer; but she positively declared she
would not write any such denial yesterday, as Jane wished her;
she would wait--and, sure enough, yesterday evening it was all
settled that Jane should go.  Quite a surprize to me!  I had not
the least idea!--Jane took Mrs. Elton aside, and told her at once,
that upon thinking over the advantages of Mrs. Smallridge's situation,
she had come to the resolution of accepting it.--I did not know a word
"Yes, all of us; Mrs. Elton would have us come.  It was settled so,
upon the hill, while we were walking about with Mr. Knightley. 
`You must all spend your evening with us,' said she--`I positively must
"No, not Mr. Knightley; he declined it from the first; and though I
thought he would come, because Mrs. Elton declared she would not let
him off, he did not;--but my mother, and Jane, and I, were all there,
and a very agreeable evening we had.  Such kind friends, you know,
Miss Woodhouse, one must always find agreeable, though every body
seemed rather fagged after the morning's party.  Even pleasure,
you know, is fatiguing--and I cannot say that any of them seemed
very much to have enjoyed it.  However, I shall always think it
a very pleasant party, and feel extremely obliged to the kind friends
"Miss Fairfax, I suppose, though you were not aware of it, had been
"Whenever the time may come, it must be unwelcome to her and all
her friends--but I hope her engagement will have every alleviation
that is possible--I mean, as to the character and manners of the family."
"Thank you, dear Miss Woodhouse.  Yes, indeed, there is every thing
in the world that can make her happy in it.  Except the Sucklings
and Bragges, there is not such another nursery establishment,
so liberal and elegant, in all Mrs. Elton's acquaintance. 
Mrs. Smallridge, a most delightful woman!--A style of living almost
equal to Maple Grove--and as to the children, except the little
Sucklings and little Bragges, there are not such elegant sweet
children anywhere.  Jane will be treated with such regard and kindness!--
It will be nothing but pleasure, a life of pleasure.--And her salary!--
I really cannot venture to name her salary to you, Miss Woodhouse. 
Even you, used as you are to great sums, would hardly believe that
so much could be given to a young person like Jane."
"Ah! madam," cried Emma, "if other children are at all like what I
remember to have been myself, I should think five times the amount
of what I have ever yet heard named as a salary on such occasions,
"Very soon, very soon, indeed; that's the worst of it. 
Within a fortnight.  Mrs. Smallridge is in a great hurry.  My poor
mother does not know how to bear it.  So then, I try to put it out of
her thoughts, and say, Come ma'am, do not let us think about it any more."
"Her friends must all be sorry to lose her; and will not Colonel
and Mrs. Campbell be sorry to find that she has engaged herself
"Yes; Jane says she is sure they will; but yet, this is such
a situation as she cannot feel herself justified in declining. 
I was so astonished when she first told me what she had been saying
to Mrs. Elton, and when Mrs. Elton at the same moment came congratulating
me upon it!  It was before tea--stay--no, it could not be before tea,
because we were just going to cards--and yet it was before tea,
because I remember thinking--Oh! no, now I recollect, now I have it;
something happened before tea, but not that.  Mr. Elton was called
out of the room before tea, old John Abdy's son wanted to speak
with him.  Poor old John, I have a great regard for him; he was clerk
to my poor father twenty-seven years; and now, poor old man, he is
bed-ridden, and very poorly with the rheumatic gout in his joints--
I must go and see him to-day; and so will Jane, I am sure, if she
gets out at all.  And poor John's son came to talk to Mr. Elton
about relief from the parish; he is very well to do himself,
you know, being head man at the Crown, ostler, and every thing
of that sort, but still he cannot keep his father without some help;
and so, when Mr. Elton came back, he told us what John ostler
had been telling him, and then it came out about the chaise having
been sent to Randalls to take Mr. Frank Churchill to Richmond. 
That was what happened before tea.  It was after tea that Jane spoke
Miss Bates would hardly give Emma time to say how perfectly
new this circumstance was to her; but as without supposing it
possible that she could be ignorant of any of the particulars
of Mr. Frank Churchill's going, she proceeded to give them all,
What Mr. Elton had learned from the ostler on the subject, being the
accumulation of the ostler's own knowledge, and the knowledge
of the servants at Randalls, was, that a messenger had come over
from Richmond soon after the return of the party from Box Hill--
which messenger, however, had been no more than was expected;
and that Mr. Churchill had sent his nephew a few lines, containing,
upon the whole, a tolerable account of Mrs. Churchill, and only
wishing him not to delay coming back beyond the next morning early;
but that Mr. Frank Churchill having resolved to go home directly,
without waiting at all, and his horse seeming to have got a cold,
Tom had been sent off immediately for the Crown chaise, and the
ostler had stood out and seen it pass by, the boy going a good pace,
There was nothing in all this either to astonish or interest,
and it caught Emma's attention only as it united with the subject
which already engaged her mind.  The contrast between Mrs. Churchill's
importance in the world, and Jane Fairfax's, struck her; one was
every thing, the other nothing--and she sat musing on the difference
of woman's destiny, and quite unconscious on what her eyes were fixed,
"Aye, I see what you are thinking of, the pianoforte.  What is to become
of that?--Very true.  Poor dear Jane was talking of it just now.--
`You must go,' said she.  `You and I must part.  You will have no
business here.--Let it stay, however,' said she; `give it houseroom
till Colonel Campbell comes back.  I shall talk about it to him;
he will settle for me; he will help me out of all my difficulties.'--
And to this day, I do believe, she knows not whether it was his
Now Emma was obliged to think of the pianoforte; and the remembrance
of all her former fanciful and unfair conjectures was so little pleasing,
that she soon allowed herself to believe her visit had been
long enough; and, with a repetition of every thing that she could
venture to say of the good wishes which she really felt, took leave.
Emma's pensive meditations, as she walked home, were not interrupted;
but on entering the parlour, she found those who must rouse her. 
Mr. Knightley and Harriet had arrived during her absence, and were
sitting with her father.--Mr. Knightley immediately got up, and in a
"I would not go away without seeing you, but I have no time to spare,
and therefore must now be gone directly.  I am going to London,
to spend a few days with John and Isabella.  Have you any thing to
send or say, besides the `love,' which nobody carries?"
"Nothing at all.  But is not this a sudden scheme?"
"Yes--rather--I have been thinking of it some little time."
Emma was sure he had not forgiven her; he looked unlike himself. 
Time, however, she thought, would tell him that they ought to be
friends again.  While he stood, as if meaning to go, but not going--
"Well, my dear, and did you get there safely?--And how did you
find my worthy old friend and her daughter?--I dare say they must
have been very much obliged to you for coming.  Dear Emma has been
to call on Mrs. and Miss Bates, Mr. Knightley, as I told you before. 
Emma's colour was heightened by this unjust praise; and with a smile,
and shake of the head, which spoke much, she looked at Mr. Knightley.--
It seemed as if there were an instantaneous impression in her favour,
as if his eyes received the truth from her's, and all that had
passed of good in her feelings were at once caught and honoured.--
He looked at her with a glow of regard.  She was warmly gratified--
and in another moment still more so, by a little movement of
more than common friendliness on his part.--He took her hand;--
whether she had not herself made the first motion, she could not say--
she might, perhaps, have rather offered it--but he took her hand,
pressed it, and certainly was on the point of carrying it to his lips--
when, from some fancy or other, he suddenly let it go.--Why he should feel
such a scruple, why he should change his mind when it was all but done,
she could not perceive.--He would have judged better, she thought,
if he had not stopped.--The intention, however, was indubitable;
and whether it was that his manners had in general so little gallantry,
or however else it happened, but she thought nothing became him more.--
It was with him, of so simple, yet so dignified a nature.--
She could not but recall the attempt with great satisfaction. 
It spoke such perfect amity.--He left them immediately afterwards--
gone in a moment.  He always moved with the alertness of a mind which
could neither be undecided nor dilatory, but now he seemed more sudden
Emma could not regret her having gone to Miss Bates, but she wished
she had left her ten minutes earlier;--it would have been a great
pleasure to talk over Jane Fairfax's situation with Mr. Knightley.--
Neither would she regret that he should be going to Brunswick Square,
for she knew how much his visit would be enjoyed--but it might have
happened at a better time--and to have had longer notice of it,
would have been pleasanter.--They parted thorough friends, however;
she could not be deceived as to the meaning of his countenance,
and his unfinished gallantry;--it was all done to assure her that she
had fully recovered his good opinion.--He had been sitting with them
half an hour, she found.  It was a pity that she had not come
In the hope of diverting her father's thoughts from the disagreeableness
of Mr. Knightley's going to London; and going so suddenly;
and going on horseback, which she knew would be all very bad;
Emma communicated her news of Jane Fairfax, and her dependence
on the effect was justified; it supplied a very useful check,--
interested, without disturbing him.  He had long made up his mind to Jane
Fairfax's going out as governess, and could talk of it cheerfully,
but Mr. Knightley's going to London had been an unexpected blow.
"I am very glad, indeed, my dear, to hear she is to be so
comfortably settled.  Mrs. Elton is very good-natured and agreeable,
and I dare say her acquaintance are just what they ought
to be.  I hope it is a dry situation, and that her health
will be taken good care of.  It ought to be a first object,
as I am sure poor Miss Taylor's always was with me.  You know,
my dear, she is going to be to this new lady what Miss Taylor
was to us.  And I hope she will be better off in one respect,
and not be induced to go away after it has been her home so long."
The following day brought news from Richmond to throw every
thing else into the background.  An express arrived at Randalls
to announce the death of Mrs. Churchill!  Though her nephew
had had no particular reason to hasten back on her account,
she had not lived above six-and-thirty hours after his return. 
A sudden seizure of a different nature from any thing foreboded
by her general state, had carried her off after a short struggle. 
It was felt as such things must be felt.  Every body had a
degree of gravity and sorrow; tenderness towards the departed,
solicitude for the surviving friends; and, in a reasonable time,
curiosity to know where she would be buried.  Goldsmith tells us,
that when lovely woman stoops to folly, she has nothing to do
but to die; and when she stoops to be disagreeable, it is equally
to be recommended as a clearer of ill-fame. Mrs. Churchill,
after being disliked at least twenty-five years, was now spoken of
with compassionate allowances.  In one point she was fully justified. 
She had never been admitted before to be seriously ill.  The event
acquitted her of all the fancifulness, and all the selfishness
"Poor Mrs. Churchill! no doubt she had been suffering a great deal: 
more than any body had ever supposed--and continual pain would try
the temper.  It was a sad event--a great shock--with all her faults,
what would Mr. Churchill do without her?  Mr. Churchill's loss
would be dreadful indeed.  Mr. Churchill would never get over it."--
Even Mr. Weston shook his head, and looked solemn, and said,
"Ah! poor woman, who would have thought it!" and resolved, that his
mourning should be as handsome as possible; and his wife sat sighing
and moralising over her broad hems with a commiseration and good sense,
true and steady.  How it would affect Frank was among the earliest
thoughts of both.  It was also a very early speculation with Emma. 
The character of Mrs. Churchill, the grief of her husband--her mind
glanced over them both with awe and compassion--and then rested
with lightened feelings on how Frank might be affected by the event,
how benefited, how freed.  She saw in a moment all the possible good. 
Now, an attachment to Harriet Smith would have nothing to encounter. 
Mr. Churchill, independent of his wife, was feared by nobody;
an easy, guidable man, to be persuaded into any thing by his nephew. 
All that remained to be wished was, that the nephew should form
the attachment, as, with all her goodwill in the cause, Emma could feel
Harriet behaved extremely well on the occasion, with great self-command.
What ever she might feel of brighter hope, she betrayed nothing.  Emma was
gratified, to observe such a proof in her of strengthened character,
and refrained from any allusion that might endanger its maintenance. 
They spoke, therefore, of Mrs. Churchill's death with mutual forbearance.
Short letters from Frank were received at Randalls, communicating
all that was immediately important of their state and plans. 
Mr. Churchill was better than could be expected; and their
first removal, on the departure of the funeral for Yorkshire,
was to be to the house of a very old friend in Windsor, to whom
Mr. Churchill had been promising a visit the last ten years. 
At present, there was nothing to be done for Harriet; good wishes
for the future were all that could yet be possible on Emma's side.
It was a more pressing concern to shew attention to Jane Fairfax,
whose prospects were closing, while Harriet's opened, and whose
engagements now allowed of no delay in any one at Highbury, who wished
to shew her kindness--and with Emma it was grown into a first wish. 
She had scarcely a stronger regret than for her past coldness;
and the person, whom she had been so many months neglecting, was now
the very one on whom she would have lavished every distinction of
regard or sympathy.  She wanted to be of use to her; wanted to shew
a value for her society, and testify respect and consideration. 
She resolved to prevail on her to spend a day at Hartfield. 
A note was written to urge it.  The invitation was refused, and by
a verbal message.  "Miss Fairfax was not well enough to write;"
and when Mr. Perry called at Hartfield, the same morning,
it appeared that she was so much indisposed as to have been visited,
though against her own consent, by himself, and that she was suffering
under severe headaches, and a nervous fever to a degree, which made
him doubt the possibility of her going to Mrs. Smallridge's at the
time proposed.  Her health seemed for the moment completely deranged--
appetite quite gone--and though there were no absolutely
alarming symptoms, nothing touching the pulmonary complaint,
which was the standing apprehension of the family, Mr. Perry was
uneasy about her.  He thought she had undertaken more than she
was equal to, and that she felt it so herself, though she would
not own it.  Her spirits seemed overcome.  Her present home,
he could not but observe, was unfavourable to a nervous disorder:--
confined always to one room;--he could have wished it otherwise--
and her good aunt, though his very old friend, he must acknowledge
to be not the best companion for an invalid of that description. 
Her care and attention could not be questioned; they were, in fact,
only too great.  He very much feared that Miss Fairfax derived more
evil than good from them.  Emma listened with the warmest concern;
grieved for her more and more, and looked around eager to discover
some way of being useful.  To take her--be it only an hour
or two--from her aunt, to give her change of air and scene,
and quiet rational conversation, even for an hour or two,
might do her good; and the following morning she wrote again to say,
in the most feeling language she could command, that she would
call for her in the carriage at any hour that Jane would name--
mentioning that she had Mr. Perry's decided opinion, in favour
of such exercise for his patient.  The answer was only in this
"Miss Fairfax's compliments and thanks, but is quite unequal
Emma felt that her own note had deserved something better; but it
was impossible to quarrel with words, whose tremulous inequality
shewed indisposition so plainly, and she thought only of how she
might best counteract this unwillingness to be seen or assisted. 
In spite of the answer, therefore, she ordered the carriage, and drove
to Mrs. Bates's, in the hope that Jane would be induced to join her--
but it would not do;--Miss Bates came to the carriage door, all gratitude,
and agreeing with her most earnestly in thinking an airing might be of
the greatest service--and every thing that message could do was tried--
but all in vain.  Miss Bates was obliged to return without success;
Jane was quite unpersuadable; the mere proposal of going out
seemed to make her worse.--Emma wished she could have seen her,
and tried her own powers; but, almost before she could hint the wish,
Miss Bates made it appear that she had promised her niece on
no account to let Miss Woodhouse in.  "Indeed, the truth was,
that poor dear Jane could not bear to see any body--any body at all--
Mrs. Elton, indeed, could not be denied--and Mrs. Cole had made
such a point--and Mrs. Perry had said so much--but, except them,
Emma did not want to be classed with the Mrs. Eltons, the Mrs. Perrys,
and the Mrs. Coles, who would force themselves anywhere;
neither could she feel any right of preference herself--
she submitted, therefore, and only questioned Miss Bates farther
as to her niece's appetite and diet, which she longed to be able
to assist.  On that subject poor Miss Bates was very unhappy,
and very communicative; Jane would hardly eat any thing:--
Mr. Perry recommended nourishing food; but every thing they could
command (and never had any body such good neighbours) was distasteful.
Emma, on reaching home, called the housekeeper directly, to an
examination of her stores; and some arrowroot of very superior quality
was speedily despatched to Miss Bates with a most friendly note. 
In half an hour the arrowroot was returned, with a thousand thanks
from Miss Bates, but "dear Jane would not be satisfied without its
being sent back; it was a thing she could not take--and, moreover,
she insisted on her saying, that she was not at all in want of any thing."
When Emma afterwards heard that Jane Fairfax had been seen wandering
about the meadows, at some distance from Highbury, on the afternoon
of the very day on which she had, under the plea of being unequal
to any exercise, so peremptorily refused to go out with her in
the carriage, she could have no doubt--putting every thing together--
that Jane was resolved to receive no kindness from her.  She was sorry,
very sorry.  Her heart was grieved for a state which seemed
but the more pitiable from this sort of irritation of spirits,
inconsistency of action, and inequality of powers; and it mortified
her that she was given so little credit for proper feeling, or esteemed
so little worthy as a friend:  but she had the consolation of knowing
that her intentions were good, and of being able to say to herself,
that could Mr. Knightley have been privy to all her attempts
of assisting Jane Fairfax, could he even have seen into her heart,
he would not, on this occasion, have found any thing to reprove.
One morning, about ten days after Mrs. Churchill's decease,
Emma was called downstairs to Mr. Weston, who "could not stay
five minutes, and wanted particularly to speak with her."--
He met her at the parlour-door, and hardly asking her how she did,
in the natural key of his voice, sunk it immediately, to say,
"Can you come to Randalls at any time this morning?--Do, if it
be possible.  Mrs. Weston wants to see you.  She must see you."
"No, no, not at all--only a little agitated.  She would have
ordered the carriage, and come to you, but she must see you alone,
and that you know--(nodding towards her father)--Humph!--Can you come?"
"Certainly.  This moment, if you please.  It is impossible to
refuse what you ask in such a way.  But what can be the matter?--
"Depend upon me--but ask no more questions.  You will know it
all in time.  The most unaccountable business!  But hush, hush!"
To guess what all this meant, was impossible even for Emma. 
Something really important seemed announced by his looks;
but, as her friend was well, she endeavoured not to be uneasy,
and settling it with her father, that she would take her walk now,
she and Mr. Weston were soon out of the house together and on
"Now,"--said Emma, when they were fairly beyond the sweep gates,--
"now Mr. Weston, do let me know what has happened."
"No, no,"--he gravely replied.--"Don't ask me.  I promised my wife
to leave it all to her.  She will break it to you better than I can. 
Do not be impatient, Emma; it will all come out too soon."
"Break it to me," cried Emma, standing still with terror.--
"Good God!--Mr. Weston, tell me at once.--Something has happened
in Brunswick Square.  I know it has.  Tell me, I charge you tell
"Mr. Weston do not trifle with me.--Consider how many of my dearest
friends are now in Brunswick Square.  Which of them is it?--
I charge you by all that is sacred, not to attempt concealment."
"Your word!--why not your honour!--why not say upon your honour,
that it has nothing to do with any of them?  Good Heavens!--What can
be to be broke to me, that does not relate to one of that family?"
"Upon my honour," said he very seriously, "it does not.  It is not
in the smallest degree connected with any human being of the name
"I was wrong," he continued, "in talking of its being broke to you. 
I should not have used the expression.  In fact, it does not concern you--
it concerns only myself,--that is, we hope.--Humph!--In short,
my dear Emma, there is no occasion to be so uneasy about it. 
I don't say that it is not a disagreeable business--but things might
be much worse.--If we walk fast, we shall soon be at Randalls."
Emma found that she must wait; and now it required little effort. 
She asked no more questions therefore, merely employed her own fancy,
and that soon pointed out to her the probability of its being some
money concern--something just come to light, of a disagreeable
nature in the circumstances of the family,--something which the late
event at Richmond had brought forward.  Her fancy was very active. 
Half a dozen natural children, perhaps--and poor Frank cut off!--
This, though very undesirable, would be no matter of agony to her. 
It inspired little more than an animating curiosity.
"Who is that gentleman on horseback?" said she, as they proceeded--
speaking more to assist Mr. Weston in keeping his secret, than with
"I do not know.--One of the Otways.--Not Frank;--it is not Frank,
I assure you.  You will not see him.  He is half way to Windsor
"Oh! yes--did not you know?--Well, well, never mind."
For a moment he was silent; and then added, in a tone much more
"Yes, Frank came over this morning, just to ask us how we did."
They hurried on, and were speedily at Randalls.--"Well, my dear,"
said he, as they entered the room--"I have brought her, and now
I hope you will soon be better.  I shall leave you together. 
There is no use in delay.  I shall not be far off, if you want me."--
And Emma distinctly heard him add, in a lower tone, before he
quitted the room,--"I have been as good as my word.  She has not the
Mrs. Weston was looking so ill, and had an air of so much perturbation,
that Emma's uneasiness increased; and the moment they were alone,
"What is it my dear friend?  Something of a very unpleasant nature,
I find, has occurred;--do let me know directly what it is. 
I have been walking all this way in complete suspense.  We both
abhor suspense.  Do not let mine continue longer.  It will do you
good to speak of your distress, whatever it may be."
"Have you indeed no idea?" said Mrs. Weston in a trembling voice. 
"Cannot you, my dear Emma--cannot you form a guess as to what you
"So far as that it relates to Mr. Frank Churchill, I do guess."
"You are right.  It does relate to him, and I will tell you directly;"
(resuming her work, and seeming resolved against looking up.)
"He has been here this very morning, on a most extraordinary errand. 
It is impossible to express our surprize.  He came to speak to his
father on a subject,--to announce an attachment--"
She stopped to breathe.  Emma thought first of herself, and then
"More than an attachment, indeed," resumed Mrs. Weston; "an engagement--
a positive engagement.--What will you say, Emma--what will any
body say, when it is known that Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax
are engaged;--nay, that they have been long engaged!"
Emma even jumped with surprize;--and, horror-struck, exclaimed,
"Jane Fairfax!--Good God!  You are not serious?  You do not mean it?"
"You may well be amazed," returned Mrs. Weston, still averting her eyes,
and talking on with eagerness, that Emma might have time to recover--
"You may well be amazed.  But it is even so.  There has been a solemn
engagement between them ever since October--formed at Weymouth,
and kept a secret from every body.  Not a creature knowing it
but themselves--neither the Campbells, nor her family, nor his.--
It is so wonderful, that though perfectly convinced of the fact,
it is yet almost incredible to myself.  I can hardly believe it.--
Emma scarcely heard what was said.--Her mind was divided between
two ideas--her own former conversations with him about Miss Fairfax;
and poor Harriet;--and for some time she could only exclaim,
"Well," said she at last, trying to recover herself; "this is a
circumstance which I must think of at least half a day, before I
can at all comprehend it.  What!--engaged to her all the winter--
"Engaged since October,--secretly engaged.--It has hurt me,
Emma, very much.  It has hurt his father equally.  Some part
Emma pondered a moment, and then replied, "I will not pretend
not to understand you; and to give you all the relief in my power,
be assured that no such effect has followed his attentions to me,
Mrs. Weston looked up, afraid to believe; but Emma's countenance
"That you may have less difficulty in believing this boast, of my
present perfect indifference," she continued, "I will farther tell you,
that there was a period in the early part of our acquaintance,
when I did like him, when I was very much disposed to be
attached to him--nay, was attached--and how it came to cease,
is perhaps the wonder.  Fortunately, however, it did cease. 
I have really for some time past, for at least these three months,
cared nothing about him.  You may believe me, Mrs. Weston. 
Mrs. Weston kissed her with tears of joy; and when she could
find utterance, assured her, that this protestation had done
her more good than any thing else in the world could do.
"Mr. Weston will be almost as much relieved as myself," said she. 
"On this point we have been wretched.  It was our darling wish that you
might be attached to each other--and we were persuaded that it was so.--
Imagine what we have been feeling on your account."
"I have escaped; and that I should escape, may be a matter of
grateful wonder to you and myself.  But this does not acquit him,
Mrs. Weston; and I must say, that I think him greatly to blame. 
What right had he to come among us with affection and faith engaged,
and with manners so very disengaged?  What right had he to endeavour
to please, as he certainly did--to distinguish any one young woman with
persevering attention, as he certainly did--while he really belonged
to another?--How could he tell what mischief he might be doing?--
How could he tell that he might not be making me in love with him?--
"From something that he said, my dear Emma, I rather imagine--"
"And how could she bear such behaviour!  Composure with a witness!
to look on, while repeated attentions were offering to another woman,
before her face, and not resent it.--That is a degree of placidity,
"There were misunderstandings between them, Emma; he said
so expressly.  He had not time to enter into much explanation. 
He was here only a quarter of an hour, and in a state of agitation
which did not allow the full use even of the time he could stay--
but that there had been misunderstandings he decidedly said. 
The present crisis, indeed, seemed to be brought on by them;
and those misunderstandings might very possibly arise from the
"Impropriety!  Oh!  Mrs. Weston--it is too calm a censure. 
Much, much beyond impropriety!--It has sunk him, I cannot say how
it has sunk him in my opinion.  So unlike what a man should be!--
None of that upright integrity, that strict adherence to truth
and principle, that disdain of trick and littleness, which a man
"Nay, dear Emma, now I must take his part; for though he has been
wrong in this instance, I have known him long enough to answer
for his having many, very many, good qualities; and--"
"Good God!" cried Emma, not attending to her.--"Mrs. Smallridge, too! 
Jane actually on the point of going as governess!  What could he
mean by such horrible indelicacy?  To suffer her to engage herself--
"He knew nothing about it, Emma.  On this article I can fully
acquit him.  It was a private resolution of hers, not communicated
to him--or at least not communicated in a way to carry conviction.--
Till yesterday, I know he said he was in the dark as to her plans. 
They burst on him, I do not know how, but by some letter or message--
and it was the discovery of what she was doing, of this very project
of hers, which determined him to come forward at once, own it
all to his uncle, throw himself on his kindness, and, in short,
put an end to the miserable state of concealment that had been
"I am to hear from him soon," continued Mrs. Weston.  "He told me
at parting, that he should soon write; and he spoke in a manner which
seemed to promise me many particulars that could not be given now. 
Let us wait, therefore, for this letter.  It may bring many extenuations. 
It may make many things intelligible and excusable which now are
not to be understood.  Don't let us be severe, don't let us be in
a hurry to condemn him.  Let us have patience.  I must love him;
and now that I am satisfied on one point, the one material point,
I am sincerely anxious for its all turning out well, and ready
to hope that it may.  They must both have suffered a great deal
"His sufferings," replied Emma dryly, "do not appear to have done
him much harm.  Well, and how did Mr. Churchill take it?"
"Most favourably for his nephew--gave his consent with scarcely
a difficulty.  Conceive what the events of a week have done
in that family!  While poor Mrs. Churchill lived, I suppose there
could not have been a hope, a chance, a possibility;--but scarcely
are her remains at rest in the family vault, than her husband is
persuaded to act exactly opposite to what she would have required. 
What a blessing it is, when undue influence does not survive the grave!--
"Ah!" thought Emma, "he would have done as much for Harriet."
"This was settled last night, and Frank was off with the light
this morning.  He stopped at Highbury, at the Bates's, I fancy,
some time--and then came on hither; but was in such a hurry to get
back to his uncle, to whom he is just now more necessary than ever,
that, as I tell you, he could stay with us but a quarter of an hour.--
He was very much agitated--very much, indeed--to a degree that made
him appear quite a different creature from any thing I had ever seen
him before.--In addition to all the rest, there had been the shock of
finding her so very unwell, which he had had no previous suspicion of--
and there was every appearance of his having been feeling a great deal."
"And do you really believe the affair to have been carrying on
with such perfect secresy?--The Campbells, the Dixons, did none
Emma could not speak the name of Dixon without a little blush.
"None; not one.  He positively said that it had been known to no
"Well," said Emma, "I suppose we shall gradually grow reconciled
to the idea, and I wish them very happy.  But I shall always
think it a very abominable sort of proceeding.  What has it been
but a system of hypocrisy and deceit,--espionage, and treachery?--
To come among us with professions of openness and simplicity;
and such a league in secret to judge us all!--Here have we been,
the whole winter and spring, completely duped, fancying ourselves
all on an equal footing of truth and honour, with two people in the
midst of us who may have been carrying round, comparing and sitting
in judgment on sentiments and words that were never meant for both
to hear.--They must take the consequence, if they have heard each
other spoken of in a way not perfectly agreeable!"
"I am quite easy on that head," replied Mrs. Weston.  "I am
very sure that I never said any thing of either to the other,
"You are in luck.--Your only blunder was confined to my ear,
when you imagined a certain friend of ours in love with the lady."
"True.  But as I have always had a thoroughly good opinion of Miss
Fairfax, I never could, under any blunder, have spoken ill of her;
and as to speaking ill of him, there I must have been safe."
At this moment Mr. Weston appeared at a little distance from the window,
evidently on the watch.  His wife gave him a look which invited
him in; and, while he was coming round, added, "Now, dearest Emma,
let me intreat you to say and look every thing that may set his
heart at ease, and incline him to be satisfied with the match. 
Let us make the best of it--and, indeed, almost every thing may
be fairly said in her favour.  It is not a connexion to gratify;
but if Mr. Churchill does not feel that, why should we? and it
may be a very fortunate circumstance for him, for Frank, I mean,
that he should have attached himself to a girl of such steadiness
of character and good judgment as I have always given her credit for--
and still am disposed to give her credit for, in spite of this
one great deviation from the strict rule of right.  And how much
may be said in her situation for even that error!"
"Much, indeed!" cried Emma feelingly.  "If a woman can ever
be excused for thinking only of herself, it is in a situation
like Jane Fairfax's.--Of such, one may almost say, that `the
She met Mr. Weston on his entrance, with a smiling countenance,
"A very pretty trick you have been playing me, upon my word! 
This was a device, I suppose, to sport with my curiosity,
and exercise my talent of guessing.  But you really frightened me. 
I thought you had lost half your property, at least.  And here,
instead of its being a matter of condolence, it turns out to be one
of congratulation.--I congratulate you, Mr. Weston, with all my heart,
on the prospect of having one of the most lovely and accomplished
A glance or two between him and his wife, convinced him that all was
as right as this speech proclaimed; and its happy effect on his spirits
was immediate.  His air and voice recovered their usual briskness: 
he shook her heartily and gratefully by the hand, and entered
on the subject in a manner to prove, that he now only wanted
time and persuasion to think the engagement no very bad thing. 
His companions suggested only what could palliate imprudence,
or smooth objections; and by the time they had talked it all
over together, and he had talked it all over again with Emma,
in their walk back to Hartfield, he was become perfectly reconciled,
and not far from thinking it the very best thing that Frank could
"Harriet, poor Harriet!"--Those were the words; in them lay the
tormenting ideas which Emma could not get rid of, and which constituted
the real misery of the business to her.  Frank Churchill had behaved
very ill by herself--very ill in many ways,--but it was not so much
his behaviour as her own, which made her so angry with him. 
It was the scrape which he had drawn her into on Harriet's account,
that gave the deepest hue to his offence.--Poor Harriet! to be a second
time the dupe of her misconceptions and flattery.  Mr. Knightley
had spoken prophetically, when he once said, "Emma, you have been
no friend to Harriet Smith."--She was afraid she had done her nothing
but disservice.--It was true that she had not to charge herself,
in this instance as in the former, with being the sole and original
author of the mischief; with having suggested such feelings as might
otherwise never have entered Harriet's imagination; for Harriet
had acknowledged her admiration and preference of Frank Churchill
before she had ever given her a hint on the subject; but she felt
completely guilty of having encouraged what she might have repressed. 
She might have prevented the indulgence and increase of such sentiments. 
Her influence would have been enough.  And now she was very conscious
that she ought to have prevented them.--She felt that she had been
risking her friend's happiness on most insufficient grounds. 
Common sense would have directed her to tell Harriet, that she
must not allow herself to think of him, and that there were five
hundred chances to one against his ever caring for her.--"But, with
common sense," she added, "I am afraid I have had little to do."
She was extremely angry with herself.  If she could not have been
angry with Frank Churchill too, it would have been dreadful.--
As for Jane Fairfax, she might at least relieve her feelings
from any present solicitude on her account.  Harriet would
be anxiety enough; she need no longer be unhappy about Jane,
whose troubles and whose ill-health having, of course, the same origin,
must be equally under cure.--Her days of insignificance and evil
were over.--She would soon be well, and happy, and prosperous.--
Emma could now imagine why her own attentions had been slighted. 
This discovery laid many smaller matters open.  No doubt it had been
from jealousy.--In Jane's eyes she had been a rival; and well might
any thing she could offer of assistance or regard be repulsed. 
An airing in the Hartfield carriage would have been the rack,
and arrowroot from the Hartfield storeroom must have been poison. 
She understood it all; and as far as her mind could disengage itself
from the injustice and selfishness of angry feelings, she acknowledged
that Jane Fairfax would have neither elevation nor happiness beyond
her desert.  But poor Harriet was such an engrossing charge! 
There was little sympathy to be spared for any body else. 
Emma was sadly fearful that this second disappointment would be
more severe than the first.  Considering the very superior claims
of the object, it ought; and judging by its apparently stronger effect
on Harriet's mind, producing reserve and self-command, it would.--
She must communicate the painful truth, however, and as soon
as possible.  An injunction of secresy had been among Mr. Weston's
parting words.  "For the present, the whole affair was to be
completely a secret.  Mr. Churchill had made a point of it,
as a token of respect to the wife he had so very recently lost;
and every body admitted it to be no more than due decorum."--
Emma had promised; but still Harriet must be excepted.  It was her
In spite of her vexation, she could not help feeling it almost ridiculous,
that she should have the very same distressing and delicate office to
perform by Harriet, which Mrs. Weston had just gone through by herself. 
The intelligence, which had been so anxiously announced to her,
she was now to be anxiously announcing to another.  Her heart beat
quick on hearing Harriet's footstep and voice; so, she supposed,
had poor Mrs. Weston felt when she was approaching Randalls. 
Could the event of the disclosure bear an equal resemblance!--
But of that, unfortunately, there could be no chance.
"Well, Miss Woodhouse!" cried Harriet, coming eagerly into the room--
"What news do you mean?" replied Emma, unable to guess, by look
or voice, whether Harriet could indeed have received any hint.
"About Jane Fairfax.  Did you ever hear any thing so strange? 
Oh!--you need not be afraid of owning it to me, for Mr. Weston has
told me himself.  I met him just now.  He told me it was to be
a great secret; and, therefore, I should not think of mentioning
"What did Mr. Weston tell you?"--said Emma, still perplexed.
"Oh! he told me all about it; that Jane Fairfax and Mr. Frank
Churchill are to be married, and that they have been privately
engaged to one another this long while.  How very odd!"
It was, indeed, so odd; Harriet's behaviour was so extremely odd,
that Emma did not know how to understand it.  Her character appeared
absolutely changed.  She seemed to propose shewing no agitation,
or disappointment, or peculiar concern in the discovery.  Emma looked
"Had you any idea," cried Harriet, "of his being in love
with her?--You, perhaps, might.--You (blushing as she spoke)
who can see into every body's heart; but nobody else--"
"Upon my word," said Emma, "I begin to doubt my having any such talent. 
Can you seriously ask me, Harriet, whether I imagined him attached
to another woman at the very time that I was--tacitly, if not openly--
encouraging you to give way to your own feelings?--I never had
the slightest suspicion, till within the last hour, of Mr. Frank
Churchill's having the least regard for Jane Fairfax.  You may be
very sure that if I had, I should have cautioned you accordingly."
"Me!" cried Harriet, colouring, and astonished.  "Why should you
caution me?--You do not think I care about Mr. Frank Churchill."
"I am delighted to hear you speak so stoutly on the subject,"
replied Emma, smiling; "but you do not mean to deny that there
was a time--and not very distant either--when you gave me reason
"Him!--never, never.  Dear Miss Woodhouse, how could you so mistake me?"
"Harriet!" cried Emma, after a moment's pause--"What do you mean?--
Good Heaven! what do you mean?--Mistake you!--Am I to suppose then?--"
She could not speak another word.--Her voice was lost; and she
sat down, waiting in great terror till Harriet should answer.
Harriet, who was standing at some distance, and with face turned
from her, did not immediately say any thing; and when she did speak,
"I should not have thought it possible," she began, "that you
could have misunderstood me!  I know we agreed never to name him--
but considering how infinitely superior he is to every body else,
I should not have thought it possible that I could be supposed
to mean any other person.  Mr. Frank Churchill, indeed!  I do not
know who would ever look at him in the company of the other. 
I hope I have a better taste than to think of Mr. Frank Churchill,
who is like nobody by his side.  And that you should have been
so mistaken, is amazing!--I am sure, but for believing that you
entirely approved and meant to encourage me in my attachment,
I should have considered it at first too great a presumption almost,
to dare to think of him.  At first, if you had not told me
that more wonderful things had happened; that there had been
matches of greater disparity (those were your very words);--
I should not have dared to give way to--I should not have thought
it possible--But if you, who had been always acquainted with him--"
"Harriet!" cried Emma, collecting herself resolutely--"Let us
understand each other now, without the possibility of farther mistake. 
"To be sure I am.  I never could have an idea of any body else--
and so I thought you knew.  When we talked about him, it was as clear
"Not quite," returned Emma, with forced calmness, "for all that
you then said, appeared to me to relate to a different person. 
I could almost assert that you had named Mr. Frank Churchill. 
I am sure the service Mr. Frank Churchill had rendered you,
in protecting you from the gipsies, was spoken of."
"My dear Harriet, I perfectly remember the substance of what I
said on the occasion.  I told you that I did not wonder at
your attachment; that considering the service he had rendered you,
it was extremely natural:--and you agreed to it, expressing yourself
very warmly as to your sense of that service, and mentioning
even what your sensations had been in seeing him come forward
to your rescue.--The impression of it is strong on my memory."
"Oh, dear," cried Harriet, "now I recollect what you mean; but I
was thinking of something very different at the time.  It was not
the gipsies--it was not Mr. Frank Churchill that I meant.  No! (with
some elevation) I was thinking of a much more precious circumstance--
of Mr. Knightley's coming and asking me to dance, when Mr. Elton
would not stand up with me; and when there was no other partner in
the room.  That was the kind action; that was the noble benevolence
and generosity; that was the service which made me begin to feel
how superior he was to every other being upon earth."
"Good God!" cried Emma, "this has been a most unfortunate--
"You would not have encouraged me, then, if you had understood me? 
At least, however, I cannot be worse off than I should have been,
if the other had been the person; and now--it is possible--"
"I do not wonder, Miss Woodhouse," she resumed, "that you should feel
a great difference between the two, as to me or as to any body. 
You must think one five hundred million times more above me than
the other.  But I hope, Miss Woodhouse, that supposing--that if--
strange as it may appear--.  But you know they were your own words,
that more wonderful things had happened, matches of greater disparity
had taken place than between Mr. Frank Churchill and me; and, therefore,
it seems as if such a thing even as this, may have occurred before--
and if I should be so fortunate, beyond expression, as to--
if Mr. Knightley should really--if he does not mind the disparity,
I hope, dear Miss Woodhouse, you will not set yourself against it,
and try to put difficulties in the way.  But you are too good for that,
Harriet was standing at one of the windows.  Emma turned round
to look at her in consternation, and hastily said,
"Have you any idea of Mr. Knightley's returning your affection?"
"Yes," replied Harriet modestly, but not fearfully--"I must say
Emma's eyes were instantly withdrawn; and she sat silently meditating,
in a fixed attitude, for a few minutes.  A few minutes were sufficient
for making her acquainted with her own heart.  A mind like hers,
once opening to suspicion, made rapid progress.  She touched--
she admitted--she acknowledged the whole truth.  Why was it
so much worse that Harriet should be in love with Mr. Knightley,
than with Frank Churchill?  Why was the evil so dreadfully increased
by Harriet's having some hope of a return?  It darted through her,
with the speed of an arrow, that Mr. Knightley must marry no one
Her own conduct, as well as her own heart, was before her in the
same few minutes.  She saw it all with a clearness which had
never blessed her before.  How improperly had she been acting
by Harriet!  How inconsiderate, how indelicate, how irrational,
how unfeeling had been her conduct!  What blindness, what madness,
had led her on!  It struck her with dreadful force, and she
was ready to give it every bad name in the world.  Some portion
of respect for herself, however, in spite of all these demerits--
some concern for her own appearance, and a strong sense of justice
by Harriet--(there would be no need of compassion to the girl
who believed herself loved by Mr. Knightley--but justice required
that she should not be made unhappy by any coldness now,)
gave Emma the resolution to sit and endure farther with calmness,
with even apparent kindness.--For her own advantage indeed, it was fit
that the utmost extent of Harriet's hopes should be enquired into;
and Harriet had done nothing to forfeit the regard and interest
which had been so voluntarily formed and maintained--or to deserve
to be slighted by the person, whose counsels had never led her right.--
Rousing from reflection, therefore, and subduing her emotion,
she turned to Harriet again, and, in a more inviting accent, renewed
the conversation; for as to the subject which had first introduced it,
the wonderful story of Jane Fairfax, that was quite sunk and lost.--
Neither of them thought but of Mr. Knightley and themselves.
Harriet, who had been standing in no unhappy reverie, was yet very glad
to be called from it, by the now encouraging manner of such a judge,
and such a friend as Miss Woodhouse, and only wanted invitation,
to give the history of her hopes with great, though trembling
delight.--Emma's tremblings as she asked, and as she listened,
were better concealed than Harriet's, but they were not less. 
Her voice was not unsteady; but her mind was in all the perturbation
that such a development of self, such a burst of threatening evil,
such a confusion of sudden and perplexing emotions, must create.--
She listened with much inward suffering, but with great outward
patience, to Harriet's detail.--Methodical, or well arranged,
or very well delivered, it could not be expected to be;
but it contained, when separated from all the feebleness and
tautology of the narration, a substance to sink her spirit--
especially with the corroborating circumstances, which her own memory
brought in favour of Mr. Knightley's most improved opinion of Harriet.
Harriet had been conscious of a difference in his behaviour ever since
those two decisive dances.--Emma knew that he had, on that occasion,
found her much superior to his expectation.  From that evening,
or at least from the time of Miss Woodhouse's encouraging her
to think of him, Harriet had begun to be sensible of his talking
to her much more than he had been used to do, and of his having
indeed quite a different manner towards her; a manner of kindness
and sweetness!--Latterly she had been more and more aware of it. 
When they had been all walking together, he had so often come and walked
by her, and talked so very delightfully!--He seemed to want to be
acquainted with her.  Emma knew it to have been very much the case. 
She had often observed the change, to almost the same extent.--
Harriet repeated expressions of approbation and praise from him--
and Emma felt them to be in the closest agreement with what she had
known of his opinion of Harriet.  He praised her for being without
art or affectation, for having simple, honest, generous, feelings.--
She knew that he saw such recommendations in Harriet; he had dwelt
on them to her more than once.--Much that lived in Harriet's memory,
many little particulars of the notice she had received from him, a look,
a speech, a removal from one chair to another, a compliment implied,
a preference inferred, had been unnoticed, because unsuspected,
by Emma.  Circumstances that might swell to half an hour's relation,
and contained multiplied proofs to her who had seen them, had passed
undiscerned by her who now heard them; but the two latest occurrences
to be mentioned, the two of strongest promise to Harriet, were not
without some degree of witness from Emma herself.--The first,
was his walking with her apart from the others, in the lime-walk
at Donwell, where they had been walking some time before Emma came,
and he had taken pains (as she was convinced) to draw her from
the rest to himself--and at first, he had talked to her in a more
particular way than he had ever done before, in a very particular
way indeed!--(Harriet could not recall it without a blush.) He seemed
to be almost asking her, whether her affections were engaged.--
But as soon as she (Miss Woodhouse) appeared likely to join them,
he changed the subject, and began talking about farming:--
The second, was his having sat talking with her nearly half an hour
before Emma came back from her visit, the very last morning of his
being at Hartfield--though, when he first came in, he had said
that he could not stay five minutes--and his having told her,
during their conversation, that though he must go to London,
it was very much against his inclination that he left home at all,
which was much more (as Emma felt) than he had acknowledged to her. 
The superior degree of confidence towards Harriet, which this one
On the subject of the first of the two circumstances, she did,
after a little reflection, venture the following question. 
"Might he not?--Is not it possible, that when enquiring, as you thought,
into the state of your affections, he might be alluding to Mr. Martin--
he might have Mr. Martin's interest in view?  But Harriet rejected
"Mr. Martin!  No indeed!--There was not a hint of Mr. Martin. 
I hope I know better now, than to care for Mr. Martin, or to be
When Harriet had closed her evidence, she appealed to her dear
Miss Woodhouse, to say whether she had not good ground for hope.
"I never should have presumed to think of it at first," said she,
"but for you.  You told me to observe him carefully, and let
his behaviour be the rule of mine--and so I have.  But now I seem
to feel that I may deserve him; and that if he does chuse me,
The bitter feelings occasioned by this speech, the many bitter
feelings, made the utmost exertion necessary on Emma's side,
"Harriet, I will only venture to declare, that Mr. Knightley is
the last man in the world, who would intentionally give any woman
the idea of his feeling for her more than he really does."
Harriet seemed ready to worship her friend for a sentence so satisfactory;
and Emma was only saved from raptures and fondness, which at
that moment would have been dreadful penance, by the sound of her
father's footsteps.  He was coming through the hall.  Harriet was
too much agitated to encounter him.  "She could not compose herself--
Mr. Woodhouse would be alarmed--she had better go;"--with most ready
encouragement from her friend, therefore, she passed off through
another door--and the moment she was gone, this was the spontaneous
burst of Emma's feelings:  "Oh God! that I had never seen her!"
The rest of the day, the following night, were hardly enough
for her thoughts.--She was bewildered amidst the confusion
of all that had rushed on her within the last few hours. 
Every moment had brought a fresh surprize; and every surprize
must be matter of humiliation to her.--How to understand it all! 
How to understand the deceptions she had been thus practising
on herself, and living under!--The blunders, the blindness of her
own head and heart!--she sat still, she walked about, she tried her
own room, she tried the shrubbery--in every place, every posture,
she perceived that she had acted most weakly; that she had been imposed
on by others in a most mortifying degree; that she had been imposing
on herself in a degree yet more mortifying; that she was wretched,
and should probably find this day but the beginning of wretchedness.
To understand, thoroughly understand her own heart, was the
first endeavour.  To that point went every leisure moment which her
father's claims on her allowed, and every moment of involuntary
How long had Mr. Knightley been so dear to her, as every feeling
declared him now to be?  When had his influence, such influence begun?--
When had he succeeded to that place in her affection, which Frank
Churchill had once, for a short period, occupied?--She looked back;
she compared the two--compared them, as they had always stood in
her estimation, from the time of the latter's becoming known to her--
and as they must at any time have been compared by her, had it--
oh! had it, by any blessed felicity, occurred to her, to institute
the comparison.--She saw that there never had been a time when she
did not consider Mr. Knightley as infinitely the superior, or when
his regard for her had not been infinitely the most dear.  She saw,
that in persuading herself, in fancying, in acting to the contrary,
she had been entirely under a delusion, totally ignorant of her
own heart--and, in short, that she had never really cared for Frank
This was the conclusion of the first series of reflection. 
This was the knowledge of herself, on the first question of inquiry,
which she reached; and without being long in reaching it.--
She was most sorrowfully indignant; ashamed of every sensation
but the one revealed to her--her affection for Mr. Knightley.--
With insufferable vanity had she believed herself in the secret of every
body's feelings; with unpardonable arrogance proposed to arrange every
body's destiny.  She was proved to have been universally mistaken;
and she had not quite done nothing--for she had done mischief. 
She had brought evil on Harriet, on herself, and she too much feared,
on Mr. Knightley.--Were this most unequal of all connexions to
take place, on her must rest all the reproach of having given it
a beginning; for his attachment, she must believe to be produced only
by a consciousness of Harriet's;--and even were this not the case,
he would never have known Harriet at all but for her folly.
Mr. Knightley and Harriet Smith!--It was a union to distance every
wonder of the kind.--The attachment of Frank Churchill and Jane
Fairfax became commonplace, threadbare, stale in the comparison,
exciting no surprize, presenting no disparity, affording nothing
to be said or thought.--Mr. Knightley and Harriet Smith!--Such an
elevation on her side!  Such a debasement on his!  It was horrible
to Emma to think how it must sink him in the general opinion,
to foresee the smiles, the sneers, the merriment it would prompt at
his expense; the mortification and disdain of his brother, the thousand
inconveniences to himself.--Could it be?--No; it was impossible. 
And yet it was far, very far, from impossible.--Was it a new
circumstance for a man of first-rate abilities to be captivated by
very inferior powers?  Was it new for one, perhaps too busy to seek,
to be the prize of a girl who would seek him?--Was it new for any
thing in this world to be unequal, inconsistent, incongruous--or for
chance and circumstance (as second causes) to direct the human fate?
Oh! had she never brought Harriet forward!  Had she left her where
she ought, and where he had told her she ought!--Had she not,
with a folly which no tongue could express, prevented her marrying
the unexceptionable young man who would have made her happy
and respectable in the line of life to which she ought to belong--
all would have been safe; none of this dreadful sequel would have been.
How Harriet could ever have had the presumption to raise
her thoughts to Mr. Knightley!--How she could dare to fancy
herself the chosen of such a man till actually assured of it!--
But Harriet was less humble, had fewer scruples than formerly.--
Her inferiority, whether of mind or situation, seemed little felt.--
She had seemed more sensible of Mr. Elton's being to stoop
in marrying her, than she now seemed of Mr. Knightley's.--
Alas! was not that her own doing too?  Who had been at pains to give
Harriet notions of self-consequence but herself?--Who but herself
had taught her, that she was to elevate herself if possible,
and that her claims were great to a high worldly establishment?--
If Harriet, from being humble, were grown vain, it was her doing too.
Till now that she was threatened with its loss, Emma had never known
how much of her happiness depended on being first with Mr. Knightley,
first in interest and affection.--Satisfied that it was so,
and feeling it her due, she had enjoyed it without reflection;
and only in the dread of being supplanted, found how inexpressibly
important it had been.--Long, very long, she felt she had been first;
for, having no female connexions of his own, there had been
only Isabella whose claims could be compared with hers, and she
had always known exactly how far he loved and esteemed Isabella. 
She had herself been first with him for many years past. 
She had not deserved it; she had often been negligent or perverse,
slighting his advice, or even wilfully opposing him, insensible of
half his merits, and quarrelling with him because he would not
acknowledge her false and insolent estimate of her own--but still,
from family attachment and habit, and thorough excellence of mind,
he had loved her, and watched over her from a girl, with an endeavour
to improve her, and an anxiety for her doing right, which no
other creature had at all shared.  In spite of all her faults,
she knew she was dear to him; might she not say, very dear?--
When the suggestions of hope, however, which must follow here,
presented themselves, she could not presume to indulge them. 
Harriet Smith might think herself not unworthy of being peculiarly,
exclusively, passionately loved by Mr. Knightley.  She could not. 
She could not flatter herself with any idea of blindness in his attachment
to her.  She had received a very recent proof of its impartiality.--
How shocked had he been by her behaviour to Miss Bates!  How directly,
how strongly had he expressed himself to her on the subject!--Not too
strongly for the offence--but far, far too strongly to issue from
any feeling softer than upright justice and clear-sighted goodwill.--
She had no hope, nothing to deserve the name of hope, that he could
have that sort of affection for herself which was now in question;
but there was a hope (at times a slight one, at times much stronger,)
that Harriet might have deceived herself, and be overrating his
regard for her.--Wish it she must, for his sake--be the consequence
nothing to herself, but his remaining single all his life. 
Could she be secure of that, indeed, of his never marrying at all,
she believed she should be perfectly satisfied.--Let him but continue
the same Mr. Knightley to her and her father, the same Mr. Knightley
to all the world; let Donwell and Hartfield lose none of their
precious intercourse of friendship and confidence, and her peace
would be fully secured.--Marriage, in fact, would not do for her. 
It would be incompatible with what she owed to her father, and with
what she felt for him.  Nothing should separate her from her father. 
She would not marry, even if she were asked by Mr. Knightley.
It must be her ardent wish that Harriet might be disappointed;
and she hoped, that when able to see them together again, she might at
least be able to ascertain what the chances for it were.--She should
see them henceforward with the closest observance; and wretchedly
as she had hitherto misunderstood even those she was watching,
she did not know how to admit that she could be blinded here.--
He was expected back every day.  The power of observation would be
soon given--frightfully soon it appeared when her thoughts were in
one course.  In the meanwhile, she resolved against seeing Harriet.--
It would do neither of them good, it would do the subject no good,
to be talking of it farther.--She was resolved not to be convinced,
as long as she could doubt, and yet had no authority for opposing
Harriet's confidence.  To talk would be only to irritate.--She wrote
to her, therefore, kindly, but decisively, to beg that she would not,
at present, come to Hartfield; acknowledging it to be her conviction,
that all farther confidential discussion of one topic had better
be avoided; and hoping, that if a few days were allowed to pass before
they met again, except in the company of others--she objected only
to a tete-a-tete--they might be able to act as if they had forgotten
the conversation of yesterday.--Harriet submitted, and approved,
This point was just arranged, when a visitor arrived to tear Emma's
thoughts a little from the one subject which had engrossed them,
sleeping or waking, the last twenty-four hours--Mrs. Weston, who had
been calling on her daughter-in-law elect, and took Hartfield in her
way home, almost as much in duty to Emma as in pleasure to herself,
to relate all the particulars of so interesting an interview.
Mr. Weston had accompanied her to Mrs. Bates's, and gone through his
share of this essential attention most handsomely; but she having
then induced Miss Fairfax to join her in an airing, was now returned
with much more to say, and much more to say with satisfaction,
than a quarter of an hour spent in Mrs. Bates's parlour, with all
the encumbrance of awkward feelings, could have afforded.
A little curiosity Emma had; and she made the most of it while
her friend related.  Mrs. Weston had set off to pay the visit
in a good deal of agitation herself; and in the first place had
wished not to go at all at present, to be allowed merely to write
to Miss Fairfax instead, and to defer this ceremonious call till
a little time had passed, and Mr. Churchill could be reconciled
to the engagement's becoming known; as, considering every thing,
she thought such a visit could not be paid without leading to reports:--
but Mr. Weston had thought differently; he was extremely anxious
to shew his approbation to Miss Fairfax and her family, and did not
conceive that any suspicion could be excited by it; or if it were,
that it would be of any consequence; for "such things," he observed,
"always got about."  Emma smiled, and felt that Mr. Weston had
very good reason for saying so.  They had gone, in short--and very
great had been the evident distress and confusion of the lady. 
She had hardly been able to speak a word, and every look and action
had shewn how deeply she was suffering from consciousness.  The quiet,
heart-felt satisfaction of the old lady, and the rapturous delight
of her daughter--who proved even too joyous to talk as usual,
had been a gratifying, yet almost an affecting, scene.  They were
both so truly respectable in their happiness, so disinterested
in every sensation; thought so much of Jane; so much of every body,
and so little of themselves, that every kindly feeling was at work
for them.  Miss Fairfax's recent illness had offered a fair plea
for Mrs. Weston to invite her to an airing; she had drawn back and
declined at first, but, on being pressed had yielded; and, in the
course of their drive, Mrs. Weston had, by gentle encouragement,
overcome so much of her embarrassment, as to bring her to converse
on the important subject.  Apologies for her seemingly ungracious
silence in their first reception, and the warmest expressions of the
gratitude she was always feeling towards herself and Mr. Weston,
must necessarily open the cause; but when these effusions were put by,
they had talked a good deal of the present and of the future state
of the engagement.  Mrs. Weston was convinced that such conversation
must be the greatest relief to her companion, pent up within her own
mind as every thing had so long been, and was very much pleased
"On the misery of what she had suffered, during the concealment
of so many months," continued Mrs. Weston, "she was energetic. 
This was one of her expressions.  `I will not say, that since I
entered into the engagement I have not had some happy moments; but I
can say, that I have never known the blessing of one tranquil hour:'--
and the quivering lip, Emma, which uttered it, was an attestation
"Poor girl!" said Emma.  "She thinks herself wrong, then, for having
"Wrong!  No one, I believe, can blame her more than she is disposed
to blame herself.  `The consequence,' said she, `has been a state
of perpetual suffering to me; and so it ought.  But after all the
punishment that misconduct can bring, it is still not less misconduct. 
Pain is no expiation.  I never can be blameless.  I have been acting
contrary to all my sense of right; and the fortunate turn that every
thing has taken, and the kindness I am now receiving, is what my
conscience tells me ought not to be.'  `Do not imagine, madam,'
she continued, `that I was taught wrong.  Do not let any reflection
fall on the principles or the care of the friends who brought
me up.  The error has been all my own; and I do assure you that,
with all the excuse that present circumstances may appear to give,
I shall yet dread making the story known to Colonel Campbell.'"
"Poor girl!" said Emma again.  "She loves him then excessively,
I suppose.  It must have been from attachment only, that she could
be led to form the engagement.  Her affection must have overpowered
"Yes, I have no doubt of her being extremely attached to him."
"I am afraid," returned Emma, sighing, "that I must often have
"On your side, my love, it was very innocently done.  But she
probably had something of that in her thoughts, when alluding
to the misunderstandings which he had given us hints of before. 
One natural consequence of the evil she had involved herself in,"
she said, "was that of making her unreasonable.  The consciousness
of having done amiss, had exposed her to a thousand inquietudes,
and made her captious and irritable to a degree that must have been--
that had been--hard for him to bear.  `I did not make the allowances,'
said she, `which I ought to have done, for his temper and spirits--
his delightful spirits, and that gaiety, that playfulness
of disposition, which, under any other circumstances, would, I am sure,
have been as constantly bewitching to me, as they were at first.' 
She then began to speak of you, and of the great kindness you
had shewn her during her illness; and with a blush which shewed me
how it was all connected, desired me, whenever I had an opportunity,
to thank you--I could not thank you too much--for every wish and
every endeavour to do her good.  She was sensible that you had never
"If I did not know her to be happy now," said Emma, seriously,
"which, in spite of every little drawback from her scrupulous
conscience, she must be, I could not bear these thanks;--for, oh! 
Mrs. Weston, if there were an account drawn up of the evil
and the good I have done Miss Fairfax!--Well (checking herself,
and trying to be more lively), this is all to be forgotten. 
You are very kind to bring me these interesting particulars. 
They shew her to the greatest advantage.  I am sure she is very good--
I hope she will be very happy.  It is fit that the fortune
should be on his side, for I think the merit will be all on hers."
Such a conclusion could not pass unanswered by Mrs. Weston. 
She thought well of Frank in almost every respect; and, what was more,
she loved him very much, and her defence was, therefore, earnest. 
She talked with a great deal of reason, and at least equal affection--
but she had too much to urge for Emma's attention; it was soon gone
to Brunswick Square or to Donwell; she forgot to attempt to listen;
and when Mrs. Weston ended with, "We have not yet had the letter
we are so anxious for, you know, but I hope it will soon come,"
she was obliged to pause before she answered, and at last obliged
to answer at random, before she could at all recollect what letter it
"Are you well, my Emma?" was Mrs. Weston's parting question.
"Oh! perfectly.  I am always well, you know.  Be sure to give me
Mrs. Weston's communications furnished Emma with more food for
unpleasant reflection, by increasing her esteem and compassion,
and her sense of past injustice towards Miss Fairfax.  She bitterly
regretted not having sought a closer acquaintance with her, and blushed
for the envious feelings which had certainly been, in some measure,
the cause.  Had she followed Mr. Knightley's known wishes, in paying
that attention to Miss Fairfax, which was every way her due; had she
tried to know her better; had she done her part towards intimacy;
had she endeavoured to find a friend there instead of in Harriet Smith;
she must, in all probability, have been spared from every pain
which pressed on her now.--Birth, abilities, and education,
had been equally marking one as an associate for her, to be received
with gratitude; and the other--what was she?--Supposing even that
they had never become intimate friends; that she had never been
admitted into Miss Fairfax's confidence on this important matter--
which was most probable--still, in knowing her as she ought,
and as she might, she must have been preserved from the abominable
suspicions of an improper attachment to Mr. Dixon, which she had
not only so foolishly fashioned and harboured herself, but had so
unpardonably imparted; an idea which she greatly feared had been made
a subject of material distress to the delicacy of Jane's feelings,
by the levity or carelessness of Frank Churchill's.  Of all the sources
of evil surrounding the former, since her coming to Highbury,
she was persuaded that she must herself have been the worst. 
She must have been a perpetual enemy.  They never could have been
all three together, without her having stabbed Jane Fairfax's peace
in a thousand instances; and on Box Hill, perhaps, it had been
The evening of this day was very long, and melancholy, at Hartfield. 
The weather added what it could of gloom.  A cold stormy rain set in,
and nothing of July appeared but in the trees and shrubs, which the
wind was despoiling, and the length of the day, which only made
The weather affected Mr. Woodhouse, and he could only be kept tolerably
comfortable by almost ceaseless attention on his daughter's side,
and by exertions which had never cost her half so much before. 
It reminded her of their first forlorn tete-a-tete, on the evening
of Mrs. Weston's wedding-day; but Mr. Knightley had walked
in then, soon after tea, and dissipated every melancholy fancy. 
Alas! such delightful proofs of Hartfield's attraction, as those
sort of visits conveyed, might shortly be over.  The picture which
she had then drawn of the privations of the approaching winter,
had proved erroneous; no friends had deserted them, no pleasures
had been lost.--But her present forebodings she feared would
experience no similar contradiction.  The prospect before her now,
was threatening to a degree that could not be entirely dispelled--
that might not be even partially brightened.  If all took place
that might take place among the circle of her friends, Hartfield must
be comparatively deserted; and she left to cheer her father with the
The child to be born at Randalls must be a tie there even dearer
than herself; and Mrs. Weston's heart and time would be occupied
by it.  They should lose her; and, probably, in great measure,
her husband also.--Frank Churchill would return among them no more;
and Miss Fairfax, it was reasonable to suppose, would soon cease
to belong to Highbury.  They would be married, and settled either
at or near Enscombe.  All that were good would be withdrawn; and if
to these losses, the loss of Donwell were to be added, what would
remain of cheerful or of rational society within their reach? 
Mr. Knightley to be no longer coming there for his evening comfort!--
No longer walking in at all hours, as if ever willing to change
his own home for their's!--How was it to be endured?  And if he were
to be lost to them for Harriet's sake; if he were to be thought
of hereafter, as finding in Harriet's society all that he wanted;
if Harriet were to be the chosen, the first, the dearest, the friend,
the wife to whom he looked for all the best blessings of existence;
what could be increasing Emma's wretchedness but the reflection never far
distant from her mind, that it had been all her own work?
When it came to such a pitch as this, she was not able to refrain
from a start, or a heavy sigh, or even from walking about the room
for a few seconds--and the only source whence any thing like consolation
or composure could be drawn, was in the resolution of her own
better conduct, and the hope that, however inferior in spirit and
gaiety might be the following and every future winter of her life
to the past, it would yet find her more rational, more acquainted
with herself, and leave her less to regret when it were gone.
The weather continued much the same all the following morning;
and the same loneliness, and the same melancholy, seemed to
reign at Hartfield--but in the afternoon it cleared; the wind
changed into a softer quarter; the clouds were carried off;
the sun appeared; it was summer again.  With all the eagerness
which such a transition gives, Emma resolved to be out of doors
as soon as possible.  Never had the exquisite sight, smell,
sensation of nature, tranquil, warm, and brilliant after a storm,
been more attractive to her.  She longed for the serenity they might
gradually introduce; and on Mr. Perry's coming in soon after dinner,
with a disengaged hour to give her father, she lost no time ill
hurrying into the shrubbery.--There, with spirits freshened,
and thoughts a little relieved, she had taken a few turns, when she
saw Mr. Knightley passing through the garden door, and coming
towards her.--It was the first intimation of his being returned
from London.  She had been thinking of him the moment before,
as unquestionably sixteen miles distant.--There was time only for
the quickest arrangement of mind.  She must be collected and calm. 
In half a minute they were together.  The "How d'ye do's" were quiet
and constrained on each side.  She asked after their mutual friends;
they were all well.--When had he left them?--Only that morning. 
He must have had a wet ride.--Yes.--He meant to walk with her,
she found.  "He had just looked into the dining-room, and as he
was not wanted there, preferred being out of doors."--She thought
he neither looked nor spoke cheerfully; and the first possible
cause for it, suggested by her fears, was, that he had perhaps been
communicating his plans to his brother, and was pained by the manner
They walked together.  He was silent.  She thought he was often
looking at her, and trying for a fuller view of her face than it
suited her to give.  And this belief produced another dread. 
Perhaps he wanted to speak to her, of his attachment to Harriet;
he might be watching for encouragement to begin.--She did not,
could not, feel equal to lead the way to any such subject. 
He must do it all himself.  Yet she could not bear this silence. 
With him it was most unnatural.  She considered--resolved--and, trying
"You have some news to hear, now you are come back, that will rather
"Have I?" said he quietly, and looking at her; "of what nature?"
After waiting a moment, as if to be sure she intended to say no more,
"If you mean Miss Fairfax and Frank Churchill, I have heard
"How is it possible?" cried Emma, turning her glowing cheeks
towards him; for, while she spoke, it occurred to her that he
"I had a few lines on parish business from Mr. Weston this morning,
and at the end of them he gave me a brief account of what had happened."
Emma was quite relieved, and could presently say, with a little
"You probably have been less surprized than any of us, for you have
had your suspicions.--I have not forgotten that you once tried to give
me a caution.--I wish I had attended to it--but--(with a sinking
voice and a heavy sigh) I seem to have been doomed to blindness."
For a moment or two nothing was said, and she was unsuspicious
of having excited any particular interest, till she found her arm
drawn within his, and pressed against his heart, and heard him
thus saying, in a tone of great sensibility, speaking low,
"Time, my dearest Emma, time will heal the wound.--Your own
excellent sense--your exertions for your father's sake--I know
you will not allow yourself--."  Her arm was pressed again,
as he added, in a more broken and subdued accent, "The feelings
of the warmest friendship--Indignation--Abominable scoundrel!"--
And in a louder, steadier tone, he concluded with, "He will soon
be gone.  They will soon be in Yorkshire.  I am sorry for her. 
Emma understood him; and as soon as she could recover from the
flutter of pleasure, excited by such tender consideration, replied,
"You are very kind--but you are mistaken--and I must set you right.--
I am not in want of that sort of compassion.  My blindness to what
was going on, led me to act by them in a way that I must always
be ashamed of, and I was very foolishly tempted to say and do many
things which may well lay me open to unpleasant conjectures, but I
have no other reason to regret that I was not in the secret earlier."
"Emma!" cried he, looking eagerly at her, "are you, indeed?"--
but checking himself--"No, no, I understand you--forgive me--I am
pleased that you can say even so much.--He is no object of regret,
indeed! and it will not be very long, I hope, before that becomes
the acknowledgment of more than your reason.--Fortunate that your
affections were not farther entangled!--I could never, I confess,
from your manners, assure myself as to the degree of what you felt--
I could only be certain that there was a preference--and a preference
which I never believed him to deserve.--He is a disgrace to the name
of man.--And is he to be rewarded with that sweet young woman?--
"Mr. Knightley," said Emma, trying to be lively, but really confused--
"I am in a very extraordinary situation.  I cannot let you continue in
your error; and yet, perhaps, since my manners gave such an impression,
I have as much reason to be ashamed of confessing that I never have
been at all attached to the person we are speaking of, as it might
be natural for a woman to feel in confessing exactly the reverse.--
He listened in perfect silence.  She wished him to speak, but he
would not.  She supposed she must say more before she were entitled
to his clemency; but it was a hard case to be obliged still to lower
"I have very little to say for my own conduct.--I was tempted
by his attentions, and allowed myself to appear pleased.--
An old story, probably--a common case--and no more than has happened
to hundreds of my sex before; and yet it may not be the more excusable
in one who sets up as I do for Understanding.  Many circumstances
assisted the temptation.  He was the son of Mr. Weston--he was
continually here--I always found him very pleasant--and, in short,
for (with a sigh) let me swell out the causes ever so ingeniously,
they all centre in this at last--my vanity was flattered, and I
allowed his attentions.  Latterly, however--for some time, indeed--
I have had no idea of their meaning any thing.--I thought them
a habit, a trick, nothing that called for seriousness on my side. 
He has imposed on me, but he has not injured me.  I have never been
attached to him.  And now I can tolerably comprehend his behaviour. 
He never wished to attach me.  It was merely a blind to conceal
his real situation with another.--It was his object to blind
all about him; and no one, I am sure, could be more effectually
blinded than myself--except that I was not blinded--that it was my
good fortune--that, in short, I was somehow or other safe from him."
She had hoped for an answer here--for a few words to say that her
conduct was at least intelligible; but he was silent; and, as far
as she could judge, deep in thought.  At last, and tolerably
"I have never had a high opinion of Frank Churchill.--I can suppose,
however, that I may have underrated him.  My acquaintance with
him has been but trifling.--And even if I have not underrated
him hitherto, he may yet turn out well.--With such a woman he has
a chance.--I have no motive for wishing him ill--and for her sake,
whose happiness will be involved in his good character and conduct,
"I have no doubt of their being happy together," said Emma;
"I believe them to be very mutually and very sincerely attached."
"He is a most fortunate man!" returned Mr. Knightley, with energy. 
"So early in life--at three-and-twenty--a period when, if a man
chuses a wife, he generally chuses ill.  At three-and-twenty
to have drawn such a prize!  What years of felicity that man,
in all human calculation, has before him!--Assured of the love of
such a woman--the disinterested love, for Jane Fairfax's character
vouches for her disinterestedness; every thing in his favour,--
equality of situation--I mean, as far as regards society, and all the
habits and manners that are important; equality in every point but one--
and that one, since the purity of her heart is not to be doubted,
such as must increase his felicity, for it will be his to bestow the
only advantages she wants.--A man would always wish to give a woman
a better home than the one he takes her from; and he who can do it,
where there is no doubt of her regard, must, I think, be the happiest
of mortals.--Frank Churchill is, indeed, the favourite of fortune. 
Every thing turns out for his good.--He meets with a young woman
at a watering-place, gains her affection, cannot even weary her
by negligent treatment--and had he and all his family sought round
the world for a perfect wife for him, they could not have found
her superior.--His aunt is in the way.--His aunt dies.--He has
only to speak.--His friends are eager to promote his happiness.--
He had used every body ill--and they are all delighted to forgive him.--
"And I do envy him, Emma.  In one respect he is the object of my envy."
Emma could say no more.  They seemed to be within half a sentence
of Harriet, and her immediate feeling was to avert the subject,
if possible.  She made her plan; she would speak of something
totally different--the children in Brunswick Square; and she
only waited for breath to begin, when Mr. Knightley startled her,
"You will not ask me what is the point of envy.--You are determined,
I see, to have no curiosity.--You are wise--but I cannot be wise. 
Emma, I must tell you what you will not ask, though I may wish it
"Oh! then, don't speak it, don't speak it," she eagerly cried. 
"Take a little time, consider, do not commit yourself."
"Thank you," said he, in an accent of deep mortification, and not
Emma could not bear to give him pain.  He was wishing to confide in her--
perhaps to consult her;--cost her what it would, she would listen. 
She might assist his resolution, or reconcile him to it;
she might give just praise to Harriet, or, by representing to him
his own independence, relieve him from that state of indecision,
which must be more intolerable than any alternative to such a mind
"No,"--replied Emma--quite confirmed by the depressed manner
in which he still spoke--"I should like to take another turn. 
Mr. Perry is not gone."  And, after proceeding a few steps, she added--
"I stopped you ungraciously, just now, Mr. Knightley, and, I am afraid,
gave you pain.--But if you have any wish to speak openly to me
as a friend, or to ask my opinion of any thing that you may have
in contemplation--as a friend, indeed, you may command me.--I will
hear whatever you like.  I will tell you exactly what I think."
"As a friend!"--repeated Mr. Knightley.--"Emma, that I fear is
a word--No, I have no wish--Stay, yes, why should I hesitate?--
I have gone too far already for concealment.--Emma, I accept your offer--
Extraordinary as it may seem, I accept it, and refer myself to you
as a friend.--Tell me, then, have I no chance of ever succeeding?"
He stopped in his earnestness to look the question, and the expression
"My dearest Emma," said he, "for dearest you will always be,
whatever the event of this hour's conversation, my dearest,
most beloved Emma--tell me at once.  Say `No,' if it is to be said."--
She could really say nothing.--"You are silent," he cried,
with great animation; "absolutely silent! at present I ask no more."
Emma was almost ready to sink under the agitation of this moment. 
The dread of being awakened from the happiest dream, was perhaps
"I cannot make speeches, Emma:"  he soon resumed; and in a tone
of such sincere, decided, intelligible tenderness as was
tolerably convincing.--"If I loved you less, I might be able
to talk about it more.  But you know what I am.--You hear nothing
but truth from me.--I have blamed you, and lectured you, and you
have borne it as no other woman in England would have borne it.--
Bear with the truths I would tell you now, dearest Emma, as well as
you have borne with them.  The manner, perhaps, may have as little
to recommend them.  God knows, I have been a very indifferent lover.--
But you understand me.--Yes, you see, you understand my feelings--
and will return them if you can.  At present, I ask only to hear,
While he spoke, Emma's mind was most busy, and, with all the wonderful
velocity of thought, had been able--and yet without losing a word--
to catch and comprehend the exact truth of the whole; to see that
Harriet's hopes had been entirely groundless, a mistake, a delusion,
as complete a delusion as any of her own--that Harriet was nothing;
that she was every thing herself; that what she had been saying
relative to Harriet had been all taken as the language of her
own feelings; and that her agitation, her doubts, her reluctance,
her discouragement, had been all received as discouragement
from herself.--And not only was there time for these convictions,
with all their glow of attendant happiness; there was time also to
rejoice that Harriet's secret had not escaped her, and to resolve
that it need not, and should not.--It was all the service she could
now render her poor friend; for as to any of that heroism of sentiment
which might have prompted her to entreat him to transfer his affection
from herself to Harriet, as infinitely the most worthy of the two--
or even the more simple sublimity of resolving to refuse him
at once and for ever, without vouchsafing any motive, because he
could not marry them both, Emma had it not.  She felt for Harriet,
with pain and with contrition; but no flight of generosity run mad,
opposing all that could be probable or reasonable, entered her brain. 
She had led her friend astray, and it would be a reproach to
her for ever; but her judgment was as strong as her feelings,
and as strong as it had ever been before, in reprobating any such
alliance for him, as most unequal and degrading.  Her way was clear,
though not quite smooth.--She spoke then, on being so entreated.--
What did she say?--Just what she ought, of course.  A lady always does.--
She said enough to shew there need not be despair--and to invite him
to say more himself.  He had despaired at one period; he had received
such an injunction to caution and silence, as for the time crushed
every hope;--she had begun by refusing to hear him.--The change had
perhaps been somewhat sudden;--her proposal of taking another turn,
her renewing the conversation which she had just put an end to,
might be a little extraordinary!--She felt its inconsistency;
but Mr. Knightley was so obliging as to put up with it, and seek no
Seldom, very seldom, does complete truth belong to any human disclosure;
seldom can it happen that something is not a little disguised,
or a little mistaken; but where, as in this case, though the conduct
is mistaken, the feelings are not, it may not be very material.--
Mr. Knightley could not impute to Emma a more relenting heart than
she possessed, or a heart more disposed to accept of his.
He had, in fact, been wholly unsuspicious of his own influence. 
He had followed her into the shrubbery with no idea of trying it. 
He had come, in his anxiety to see how she bore Frank Churchill's
engagement, with no selfish view, no view at all, but of endeavouring,
if she allowed him an opening, to soothe or to counsel her.--The rest
had been the work of the moment, the immediate effect of what he heard,
on his feelings.  The delightful assurance of her total indifference
towards Frank Churchill, of her having a heart completely disengaged
from him, had given birth to the hope, that, in time, he might gain
her affection himself;--but it had been no present hope--he had only,
in the momentary conquest of eagerness over judgment, aspired to be
told that she did not forbid his attempt to attach her.--The superior
hopes which gradually opened were so much the more enchanting.--
The affection, which he had been asking to be allowed to create,
if he could, was already his!--Within half an hour, he had passed
from a thoroughly distressed state of mind, to something so like
perfect happiness, that it could bear no other name.
Her change was equal.--This one half-hour had given to each the
same precious certainty of being beloved, had cleared from each
the same degree of ignorance, jealousy, or distrust.--On his side,
there had been a long-standing jealousy, old as the arrival,
or even the expectation, of Frank Churchill.--He had been in love
with Emma, and jealous of Frank Churchill, from about the same period,
one sentiment having probably enlightened him as to the other. 
It was his jealousy of Frank Churchill that had taken him from
the country.--The Box Hill party had decided him on going away. 
He would save himself from witnessing again such permitted,
encouraged attentions.--He had gone to learn to be indifferent.--
But he had gone to a wrong place.  There was too much domestic
happiness in his brother's house; woman wore too amiable a form in it;
Isabella was too much like Emma--differing only in those striking
inferiorities, which always brought the other in brilliancy before him,
for much to have been done, even had his time been longer.--He had
stayed on, however, vigorously, day after day--till this very morning's
post had conveyed the history of Jane Fairfax.--Then, with the
gladness which must be felt, nay, which he did not scruple to feel,
having never believed Frank Churchill to be at all deserving Emma,
was there so much fond solicitude, so much keen anxiety for her,
that he could stay no longer.  He had ridden home through the rain;
and had walked up directly after dinner, to see how this sweetest
and best of all creatures, faultless in spite of all her faults,
He had found her agitated and low.--Frank Churchill was a villain.--
He heard her declare that she had never loved him.  Frank Churchill's
character was not desperate.--She was his own Emma, by hand and word,
when they returned into the house; and if he could have thought
of Frank Churchill then, he might have deemed him a very good sort
What totally different feelings did Emma take back into the house
from what she had brought out!--she had then been only daring to hope
for a little respite of suffering;--she was now in an exquisite
flutter of happiness, and such happiness moreover as she believed
must still be greater when the flutter should have passed away.
They sat down to tea--the same party round the same table--
how often it had been collected!--and how often had her eyes fallen
on the same shrubs in the lawn, and observed the same beautiful
effect of the western sun!--But never in such a state of spirits,
never in any thing like it; and it was with difficulty that she could
summon enough of her usual self to be the attentive lady of the house,
Poor Mr. Woodhouse little suspected what was plotting against him
in the breast of that man whom he was so cordially welcoming, and so
anxiously hoping might not have taken cold from his ride.--Could he
have seen the heart, he would have cared very little for the lungs;
but without the most distant imagination of the impending evil,
without the slightest perception of any thing extraordinary in
the looks or ways of either, he repeated to them very comfortably
all the articles of news he had received from Mr. Perry, and talked
on with much self-contentment, totally unsuspicious of what they
As long as Mr. Knightley remained with them, Emma's fever continued;
but when he was gone, she began to be a little tranquillised
and subdued--and in the course of the sleepless night, which was
the tax for such an evening, she found one or two such very serious
points to consider, as made her feel, that even her happiness
must have some alloy.  Her father--and Harriet.  She could not be
alone without feeling the full weight of their separate claims;
and how to guard the comfort of both to the utmost, was the question. 
With respect to her father, it was a question soon answered. 
She hardly knew yet what Mr. Knightley would ask; but a very short
parley with her own heart produced the most solemn resolution
of never quitting her father.--She even wept over the idea of it,
as a sin of thought.  While he lived, it must be only an engagement;
but she flattered herself, that if divested of the danger of
drawing her away, it might become an increase of comfort to him.--
How to do her best by Harriet, was of more difficult decision;--
how to spare her from any unnecessary pain; how to make
her any possible atonement; how to appear least her enemy?--
On these subjects, her perplexity and distress were very great--
and her mind had to pass again and again through every bitter
reproach and sorrowful regret that had ever surrounded it.--
She could only resolve at last, that she would still avoid a
meeting with her, and communicate all that need be told by letter;
that it would be inexpressibly desirable to have her removed just
now for a time from Highbury, and--indulging in one scheme more--
nearly resolve, that it might be practicable to get an invitation
for her to Brunswick Square.--Isabella had been pleased with Harriet;
and a few weeks spent in London must give her some amusement.--
She did not think it in Harriet's nature to escape being benefited
by novelty and variety, by the streets, the shops, and the children.--
At any rate, it would be a proof of attention and kindness in herself,
from whom every thing was due; a separation for the present; an averting
of the evil day, when they must all be together again.
She rose early, and wrote her letter to Harriet; an employment
which left her so very serious, so nearly sad, that Mr. Knightley,
in walking up to Hartfield to breakfast, did not arrive at all too soon;
and half an hour stolen afterwards to go over the same ground again
with him, literally and figuratively, was quite necessary to reinstate
her in a proper share of the happiness of the evening before.
He had not left her long, by no means long enough for her to have
the slightest inclination for thinking of any body else, when a letter
was brought her from Randalls--a very thick letter;--she guessed
what it must contain, and deprecated the necessity of reading it.--
She was now in perfect charity with Frank Churchill; she wanted
no explanations, she wanted only to have her thoughts to herself--
and as for understanding any thing he wrote, she was sure she was
incapable of it.--It must be waded through, however.  She opened
the packet; it was too surely so;--a note from Mrs. Weston to herself,
"I have the greatest pleasure, my dear Emma, in forwarding
to you the enclosed.  I know what thorough justice you will
do it, and have scarcely a doubt of its happy effect.--I think
we shall never materially disagree about the writer again;
but I will not delay you by a long preface.--We are quite well.--
This letter has been the cure of all the little nervousness I have
been feeling lately.--I did not quite like your looks on Tuesday,
but it was an ungenial morning; and though you will never own being
affected by weather, I think every body feels a north-east wind.--
I felt for your dear father very much in the storm of Tuesday
afternoon and yesterday morning, but had the comfort of hearing
last night, by Mr. Perry, that it had not made him ill.
                                                       "A. W."
                                                       WINDSOR-JULY.
"If I made myself intelligible yesterday, this letter will be expected;
but expected or not, I know it will be read with candour and indulgence.--
You are all goodness, and I believe there will be need of even
all your goodness to allow for some parts of my past conduct.--
But I have been forgiven by one who had still more to resent. 
My courage rises while I write.  It is very difficult for the
prosperous to be humble.  I have already met with such success
in two applications for pardon, that I may be in danger of thinking
myself too sure of yours, and of those among your friends who have
had any ground of offence.--You must all endeavour to comprehend
the exact nature of my situation when I first arrived at Randalls;
you must consider me as having a secret which was to be kept
at all hazards.  This was the fact.  My right to place myself
in a situation requiring such concealment, is another question. 
I shall not discuss it here.  For my temptation to think it a right,
I refer every caviller to a brick house, sashed windows below,
and casements above, in Highbury.  I dared not address her openly;
my difficulties in the then state of Enscombe must be too well
known to require definition; and I was fortunate enough to prevail,
before we parted at Weymouth, and to induce the most upright female
mind in the creation to stoop in charity to a secret engagement.--
Had she refused, I should have gone mad.--But you will be ready to say,
what was your hope in doing this?--What did you look forward to?--
To any thing, every thing--to time, chance, circumstance, slow effects,
sudden bursts, perseverance and weariness, health and sickness. 
Every possibility of good was before me, and the first of blessings
secured, in obtaining her promises of faith and correspondence. 
If you need farther explanation, I have the honour, my dear madam,
of being your husband's son, and the advantage of inheriting
a disposition to hope for good, which no inheritance of houses
or lands can ever equal the value of.--See me, then, under these
circumstances, arriving on my first visit to Randalls;--and here I
am conscious of wrong, for that visit might have been sooner paid. 
You will look back and see that I did not come till Miss Fairfax
was in Highbury; and as you were the person slighted, you will
forgive me instantly; but I must work on my father's compassion,
by reminding him, that so long as I absented myself from his house,
so long I lost the blessing of knowing you.  My behaviour,
during the very happy fortnight which I spent with you, did not,
I hope, lay me open to reprehension, excepting on one point. 
And now I come to the principal, the only important part of my
conduct while belonging to you, which excites my own anxiety,
or requires very solicitous explanation.  With the greatest respect,
and the warmest friendship, do I mention Miss Woodhouse; my father
perhaps will think I ought to add, with the deepest humiliation.--
A few words which dropped from him yesterday spoke his opinion,
and some censure I acknowledge myself liable to.--My behaviour
to Miss Woodhouse indicated, I believe, more than it ought.--
In order to assist a concealment so essential to me, I was led
on to make more than an allowable use of the sort of intimacy
into which we were immediately thrown.--I cannot deny that Miss
Woodhouse was my ostensible object--but I am sure you will believe
the declaration, that had I not been convinced of her indifference,
I would not have been induced by any selfish views to go on.--
Amiable and delightful as Miss Woodhouse is, she never gave me
the idea of a young woman likely to be attached; and that she was
perfectly free from any tendency to being attached to me, was as much
my conviction as my wish.--She received my attentions with an easy,
friendly, goodhumoured playfulness, which exactly suited me. 
We seemed to understand each other.  From our relative situation,
those attentions were her due, and were felt to be so.--Whether Miss
Woodhouse began really to understand me before the expiration of
that fortnight, I cannot say;--when I called to take leave of her,
I remember that I was within a moment of confessing the truth,
and I then fancied she was not without suspicion; but I have no
doubt of her having since detected me, at least in some degree.--
She may not have surmised the whole, but her quickness must
have penetrated a part.  I cannot doubt it.  You will find,
whenever the subject becomes freed from its present restraints,
that it did not take her wholly by surprize.  She frequently gave
me hints of it.  I remember her telling me at the ball, that I
owed Mrs. Elton gratitude for her attentions to Miss Fairfax.--
I hope this history of my conduct towards her will be admitted
by you and my father as great extenuation of what you saw amiss. 
While you considered me as having sinned against Emma Woodhouse,
I could deserve nothing from either.  Acquit me here, and procure
for me, when it is allowable, the acquittal and good wishes of that
said Emma Woodhouse, whom I regard with so much brotherly affection,
as to long to have her as deeply and as happily in love as myself.--
Whatever strange things I said or did during that fortnight, you have
now a key to.  My heart was in Highbury, and my business was to get
my body thither as often as might be, and with the least suspicion. 
If you remember any queernesses, set them all to the right account.--
Of the pianoforte so much talked of, I feel it only necessary to say,
that its being ordered was absolutely unknown to Miss F--, who would
never have allowed me to send it, had any choice been given her.--
The delicacy of her mind throughout the whole engagement,
my dear madam, is much beyond my power of doing justice to. 
You will soon, I earnestly hope, know her thoroughly yourself.--
No description can describe her.  She must tell you herself what she is--
yet not by word, for never was there a human creature who would
so designedly suppress her own merit.--Since I began this letter,
which will be longer than I foresaw, I have heard from her.--
She gives a good account of her own health; but as she never complains,
I dare not depend.  I want to have your opinion of her looks. 
I know you will soon call on her; she is living in dread of the visit. 
Perhaps it is paid already.  Let me hear from you without delay;
I am impatient for a thousand particulars.  Remember how few
minutes I was at Randalls, and in how bewildered, how mad a state: 
and I am not much better yet; still insane either from happiness
or misery.  When I think of the kindness and favour I have met with,
of her excellence and patience, and my uncle's generosity, I am mad
with joy:  but when I recollect all the uneasiness I occasioned her,
and how little I deserve to be forgiven, I am mad with anger. 
If I could but see her again!--But I must not propose it yet. 
My uncle has been too good for me to encroach.--I must still add
to this long letter.  You have not heard all that you ought to hear. 
I could not give any connected detail yesterday; but the suddenness,
and, in one light, the unseasonableness with which the affair burst out,
needs explanation; for though the event of the 26th ult., as you
will conclude, immediately opened to me the happiest prospects,
I should not have presumed on such early measures, but from the
very particular circumstances, which left me not an hour to lose. 
I should myself have shrunk from any thing so hasty, and she would have
felt every scruple of mine with multiplied strength and refinement.--
But I had no choice.  The hasty engagement she had entered into with
that woman--Here, my dear madam, I was obliged to leave off abruptly,
to recollect and compose myself.--I have been walking over the country,
and am now, I hope, rational enough to make the rest of my letter
what it ought to be.--It is, in fact, a most mortifying retrospect
for me.  I behaved shamefully.  And here I can admit, that my manners
to Miss W., in being unpleasant to Miss F., were highly blameable. 
She disapproved them, which ought to have been enough.--My plea of
concealing the truth she did not think sufficient.--She was displeased;
I thought unreasonably so:  I thought her, on a thousand occasions,
unnecessarily scrupulous and cautious:  I thought her even cold. 
But she was always right.  If I had followed her judgment, and subdued
my spirits to the level of what she deemed proper, I should have
escaped the greatest unhappiness I have ever known.--We quarrelled.--
Do you remember the morning spent at Donwell?--There every little
dissatisfaction that had occurred before came to a crisis.  I was late;
I met her walking home by herself, and wanted to walk with her,
but she would not suffer it.  She absolutely refused to allow me,
which I then thought most unreasonable.  Now, however, I see nothing
in it but a very natural and consistent degree of discretion. 
While I, to blind the world to our engagement, was behaving one
hour with objectionable particularity to another woman, was she
to be consenting the next to a proposal which might have made
every previous caution useless?--Had we been met walking together
between Donwell and Highbury, the truth must have been suspected.--
I was mad enough, however, to resent.--I doubted her affection. 
I doubted it more the next day on Box Hill; when, provoked by
such conduct on my side, such shameful, insolent neglect of her,
and such apparent devotion to Miss W., as it would have been
impossible for any woman of sense to endure, she spoke her
resentment in a form of words perfectly intelligible to me.--
In short, my dear madam, it was a quarrel blameless on her side,
abominable on mine; and I returned the same evening to Richmond,
though I might have staid with you till the next morning,
merely because I would be as angry with her as possible.  Even then,
I was not such a fool as not to mean to be reconciled in time;
but I was the injured person, injured by her coldness, and I went
away determined that she should make the first advances.--I shall
always congratulate myself that you were not of the Box Hill party. 
Had you witnessed my behaviour there, I can hardly suppose you would
ever have thought well of me again.  Its effect upon her appears
in the immediate resolution it produced:  as soon as she found I
was really gone from Randalls, she closed with the offer of that
officious Mrs. Elton; the whole system of whose treatment of her,
by the bye, has ever filled me with indignation and hatred. 
I must not quarrel with a spirit of forbearance which has been
so richly extended towards myself; but, otherwise, I should loudly
protest against the share of it which that woman has known.--
"Jane," indeed!--You will observe that I have not yet indulged myself
in calling her by that name, even to you.  Think, then, what I must
have endured in hearing it bandied between the Eltons with all
the vulgarity of needless repetition, and all the insolence of
imaginary superiority.  Have patience with me, I shall soon have done.--
She closed with this offer, resolving to break with me entirely,
and wrote the next day to tell me that we never were to meet again.--
She felt the engagement to be a source of repentance and misery
to each:  she dissolved it.--This letter reached me on the very
morning of my poor aunt's death.  I answered it within an hour;
but from the confusion of my mind, and the multiplicity of business
falling on me at once, my answer, instead of being sent with all
the many other letters of that day, was locked up in my writing-desk;
and I, trusting that I had written enough, though but a few lines,
to satisfy her, remained without any uneasiness.--I was rather
disappointed that I did not hear from her again speedily;
but I made excuses for her, and was too busy, and--may I add?--
too cheerful in my views to be captious.--We removed to Windsor;
and two days afterwards I received a parcel from her, my own letters
all returned!--and a few lines at the same time by the post,
stating her extreme surprize at not having had the smallest reply
to her last; and adding, that as silence on such a point could
not be misconstrued, and as it must be equally desirable to both
to have every subordinate arrangement concluded as soon as possible,
she now sent me, by a safe conveyance, all my letters, and requested,
that if I could not directly command hers, so as to send them
to Highbury within a week, I would forward them after that period
to her at--:  in short, the full direction to Mr. Smallridge's,
near Bristol, stared me in the face.  I knew the name, the place,
I knew all about it, and instantly saw what she had been doing. 
It was perfectly accordant with that resolution of character
which I knew her to possess; and the secrecy she had maintained,
as to any such design in her former letter, was equally descriptive
of its anxious delicacy.  For the world would not she have seemed
to threaten me.--Imagine the shock; imagine how, till I had actually
detected my own blunder, I raved at the blunders of the post.--
What was to be done?--One thing only.--I must speak to my uncle. 
Without his sanction I could not hope to be listened to again.--
I spoke; circumstances were in my favour; the late event had softened
away his pride, and he was, earlier than I could have anticipated,
wholly reconciled and complying; and could say at last, poor man!
with a deep sigh, that he wished I might find as much happiness
in the marriage state as he had done.--I felt that it would be
of a different sort.--Are you disposed to pity me for what I must
have suffered in opening the cause to him, for my suspense while
all was at stake?--No; do not pity me till I reached Highbury,
and saw how ill I had made her.  Do not pity me till I saw her wan,
sick looks.--I reached Highbury at the time of day when, from my
knowledge of their late breakfast hour, I was certain of a good chance
of finding her alone.--I was not disappointed; and at last I was
not disappointed either in the object of my journey.  A great deal
of very reasonable, very just displeasure I had to persuade away. 
But it is done; we are reconciled, dearer, much dearer, than ever,
and no moment's uneasiness can ever occur between us again.  Now, my
dear madam, I will release you; but I could not conclude before. 
A thousand and a thousand thanks for all the kindness you have
ever shewn me, and ten thousand for the attentions your heart
will dictate towards her.--If you think me in a way to be happier
than I deserve, I am quite of your opinion.--Miss W. calls me
the child of good fortune.  I hope she is right.--In one respect,
my good fortune is undoubted, that of being able to subscribe
                    Your obliged and affectionate Son,
                                          F. C. WESTON CHURCHILL.
This letter must make its way to Emma's feelings.  She was obliged,
in spite of her previous determination to the contrary, to do
it all the justice that Mrs. Weston foretold.  As soon as she
came to her own name, it was irresistible; every line relating
to herself was interesting, and almost every line agreeable;
and when this charm ceased, the subject could still maintain itself,
by the natural return of her former regard for the writer, and the
very strong attraction which any picture of love must have for her at
that moment.  She never stopt till she had gone through the whole;
and though it was impossible not to feel that he had been wrong,
yet he had been less wrong than she had supposed--and he had suffered,
and was very sorry--and he was so grateful to Mrs. Weston,
and so much in love with Miss Fairfax, and she was so happy herself,
that there was no being severe; and could he have entered the room,
she must have shaken hands with him as heartily as ever.
She thought so well of the letter, that when Mr. Knightley came again,
she desired him to read it.  She was sure of Mrs. Weston's wishing
it to be communicated; especially to one, who, like Mr. Knightley,
"I shall be very glad to look it over," said he; "but it seems long. 
But that would not do.  Mr. Weston was to call in the evening,
"I would rather be talking to you," he replied; "but as it seems
He began--stopping, however, almost directly to say, "Had I been offered
the sight of one of this gentleman's letters to his mother-in-law a few
months ago, Emma, it would not have been taken with such indifference."
He proceeded a little farther, reading to himself; and then,
with a smile, observed, "Humph! a fine complimentary opening: 
But it is his way.  One man's style must not be the rule of another's.
"It will be natural for me," he added shortly afterwards, "to speak my
opinion aloud as I read.  By doing it, I shall feel that I am near you. 
It will not be so great a loss of time:  but if you dislike it--"
Mr. Knightley returned to his reading with greater alacrity.
"He trifles here," said he, "as to the temptation.  He knows
he is wrong, and has nothing rational to urge.--Bad.--He ought
not to have formed the engagement.--`His father's disposition:'--
he is unjust, however, to his father.  Mr. Weston's sanguine
temper was a blessing on all his upright and honourable exertions;
but Mr. Weston earned every present comfort before he endeavoured
to gain it.--Very true; he did not come till Miss Fairfax was here."
"And I have not forgotten," said Emma, "how sure you were that he
might have come sooner if he would.  You pass it over very handsomely--
"I was not quite impartial in my judgment, Emma:--but yet, I think--
had you not been in the case--I should still have distrusted him."
When he came to Miss Woodhouse, he was obliged to read the whole
of it aloud--all that related to her, with a smile; a look;
a shake of the head; a word or two of assent, or disapprobation;
or merely of love, as the subject required; concluding, however,
"Very bad--though it might have been worse.--Playing a most
dangerous game.  Too much indebted to the event for his acquittal.--
No judge of his own manners by you.--Always deceived in fact by his
own wishes, and regardless of little besides his own convenience.--
Fancying you to have fathomed his secret.  Natural enough!--
his own mind full of intrigue, that he should suspect it
in others.--Mystery; Finesse--how they pervert the understanding! 
My Emma, does not every thing serve to prove more and more the
beauty of truth and sincerity in all our dealings with each other?"
Emma agreed to it, and with a blush of sensibility on Harriet's account,
which she could not give any sincere explanation of.
He did so, but very soon stopt again to say, "the pianoforte! 
Ah!  That was the act of a very, very young man, one too young
to consider whether the inconvenience of it might not very much
exceed the pleasure.  A boyish scheme, indeed!--I cannot
comprehend a man's wishing to give a woman any proof of affection
which he knows she would rather dispense with; and he did
know that she would have prevented the instrument's coming if she could."
After this, he made some progress without any pause. 
Frank Churchill's confession of having behaved shamefully
was the first thing to call for more than a word in passing.
"I perfectly agree with you, sir,"--was then his remark. 
"You did behave very shamefully.  You never wrote a truer line." 
And having gone through what immediately followed of the basis
of their disagreement, and his persisting to act in direct
opposition to Jane Fairfax's sense of right, he made a fuller pause
to say, "This is very bad.--He had induced her to place herself,
for his sake, in a situation of extreme difficulty and uneasiness,
and it should have been his first object to prevent her from
suffering unnecessarily.--She must have had much more to contend with,
in carrying on the correspondence, than he could.  He should have
respected even unreasonable scruples, had there been such; but hers
were all reasonable.  We must look to her one fault, and remember
that she had done a wrong thing in consenting to the engagement,
to bear that she should have been in such a state of punishment."
Emma knew that he was now getting to the Box Hill party,
and grew uncomfortable.  Her own behaviour had been so very improper! 
She was deeply ashamed, and a little afraid of his next look. 
It was all read, however, steadily, attentively, and without
the smallest remark; and, excepting one momentary glance at her,
instantly withdrawn, in the fear of giving pain--no remembrance
"There is no saying much for the delicacy of our good friends,
the Eltons," was his next observation.--"His feelings are natural.--
What! actually resolve to break with him entirely!--She felt
the engagement to be a source of repentance and misery to each--
she dissolved it.--What a view this gives of her sense of
his behaviour!--Well, he must be a most extraordinary--"
"Nay, nay, read on.--You will find how very much he suffers."
"I hope he does," replied Mr. Knightley coolly, and resuming the letter. 
"`Smallridge!'--What does this mean?  What is all this?"
"She had engaged to go as governess to Mrs. Smallridge's children--
a dear friend of Mrs. Elton's--a neighbour of Maple Grove; and,
by the bye, I wonder how Mrs. Elton bears the disappointment?"
"Say nothing, my dear Emma, while you oblige me to read--not even
of Mrs. Elton.  Only one page more.  I shall soon have done. 
"I wish you would read it with a kinder spirit towards him."
"Well, there is feeling here.--He does seem to have suffered in finding
her ill.--Certainly, I can have no doubt of his being fond of her. 
`Dearer, much dearer than ever.'  I hope he may long continue to feel
all the value of such a reconciliation.--He is a very liberal thanker,
with his thousands and tens of thousands.--`Happier than I deserve.' 
Come, he knows himself there.  `Miss Woodhouse calls me the child
of good fortune.'--Those were Miss Woodhouse's words, were they?--
And a fine ending--and there is the letter.  The child of good fortune! 
"You do not appear so well satisfied with his letter as I am;
but still you must, at least I hope you must, think the better
of him for it.  I hope it does him some service with you."
"Yes, certainly it does.  He has had great faults, faults of
inconsideration and thoughtlessness; and I am very much of his
opinion in thinking him likely to be happier than he deserves: 
but still as he is, beyond a doubt, really attached to Miss Fairfax,
and will soon, it may be hoped, have the advantage of being constantly
with her, I am very ready to believe his character will improve,
and acquire from hers the steadiness and delicacy of principle
that it wants.  And now, let me talk to you of something else. 
I have another person's interest at present so much at heart,
that I cannot think any longer about Frank Churchill.  Ever since I
left you this morning, Emma, my mind has been hard at work on
The subject followed; it was in plain, unaffected, gentlemanlike English,
such as Mr. Knightley used even to the woman he was in love with,
how to be able to ask her to marry him, without attacking the
happiness of her father.  Emma's answer was ready at the first word. 
"While her dear father lived, any change of condition must be impossible
for her.  She could never quit him."  Part only of this answer,
however, was admitted.  The impossibility of her quitting her father,
Mr. Knightley felt as strongly as herself; but the inadmissibility
of any other change, he could not agree to.  He had been thinking
it over most deeply, most intently; he had at first hoped to induce
Mr. Woodhouse to remove with her to Donwell; he had wanted to believe
it feasible, but his knowledge of Mr. Woodhouse would not suffer
him to deceive himself long; and now he confessed his persuasion,
that such a transplantation would be a risk of her father's comfort,
perhaps even of his life, which must not be hazarded.  Mr. Woodhouse
taken from Hartfield!--No, he felt that it ought not to be attempted. 
But the plan which had arisen on the sacrifice of this, he trusted
his dearest Emma would not find in any respect objectionable;
it was, that he should be received at Hartfield; that so long as
her father's happiness in other words his life--required Hartfield
Of their all removing to Donwell, Emma had already had her own
passing thoughts.  Like him, she had tried the scheme and rejected it;
but such an alternative as this had not occurred to her. 
She was sensible of all the affection it evinced.  She felt that,
in quitting Donwell, he must be sacrificing a great deal of independence
of hours and habits; that in living constantly with her father,
and in no house of his own, there would be much, very much,
to be borne with.  She promised to think of it, and advised him
to think of it more; but he was fully convinced, that no reflection
could alter his wishes or his opinion on the subject.  He had
given it, he could assure her, very long and calm consideration;
he had been walking away from William Larkins the whole morning,
"Ah! there is one difficulty unprovided for," cried Emma.  "I am
sure William Larkins will not like it.  You must get his consent
She promised, however, to think of it; and pretty nearly promised, moreover,
to think of it, with the intention of finding it a very good scheme.
It is remarkable, that Emma, in the many, very many, points of view
in which she was now beginning to consider Donwell Abbey, was never
struck with any sense of injury to her nephew Henry, whose rights
as heir-expectant had formerly been so tenaciously regarded. 
Think she must of the possible difference to the poor little boy;
and yet she only gave herself a saucy conscious smile about it,
and found amusement in detecting the real cause of that violent
dislike of Mr. Knightley's marrying Jane Fairfax, or any body else,
which at the time she had wholly imputed to the amiable solicitude of
This proposal of his, this plan of marrying and continuing at Hartfield--
the more she contemplated it, the more pleasing it became. 
His evils seemed to lessen, her own advantages to increase,
their mutual good to outweigh every drawback.  Such a companion
for herself in the periods of anxiety and cheerlessness before her!--
Such a partner in all those duties and cares to which time must be
She would have been too happy but for poor Harriet; but every
blessing of her own seemed to involve and advance the sufferings
of her friend, who must now be even excluded from Hartfield. 
The delightful family party which Emma was securing for herself,
poor Harriet must, in mere charitable caution, be kept at a
distance from.  She would be a loser in every way.  Emma could not
deplore her future absence as any deduction from her own enjoyment. 
In such a party, Harriet would be rather a dead weight than otherwise;
but for the poor girl herself, it seemed a peculiarly cruel necessity
that was to be placing her in such a state of unmerited punishment.
In time, of course, Mr. Knightley would be forgotten, that is,
supplanted; but this could not be expected to happen very early. 
Mr. Knightley himself would be doing nothing to assist the cure;--
not like Mr. Elton.  Mr. Knightley, always so kind, so feeling,
so truly considerate for every body, would never deserve to be
less worshipped than now; and it really was too much to hope even
of Harriet, that she could be in love with more than three men
It was a very great relief to Emma to find Harriet as desirous
as herself to avoid a meeting.  Their intercourse was painful
enough by letter.  How much worse, had they been obliged to meet!
Harriet expressed herself very much as might be supposed,
without reproaches, or apparent sense of ill-usage; and yet Emma fancied
there was a something of resentment, a something bordering on it in
her style, which increased the desirableness of their being separate.--
It might be only her own consciousness; but it seemed as if an
angel only could have been quite without resentment under such a stroke.
She had no difficulty in procuring Isabella's invitation;
and she was fortunate in having a sufficient reason for asking it,
without resorting to invention.--There was a tooth amiss. 
Harriet really wished, and had wished some time, to consult a dentist. 
Mrs. John Knightley was delighted to be of use; any thing of ill
health was a recommendation to her--and though not so fond of a
dentist as of a Mr. Wingfield, she was quite eager to have Harriet
under her care.--When it was thus settled on her sister's side,
Emma proposed it to her friend, and found her very persuadable.--
Harriet was to go; she was invited for at least a fortnight; she was
to be conveyed in Mr. Woodhouse's carriage.--It was all arranged,
it was all completed, and Harriet was safe in Brunswick Square.
Now Emma could, indeed, enjoy Mr. Knightley's visits; now she
could talk, and she could listen with true happiness, unchecked by
that sense of injustice, of guilt, of something most painful,
which had haunted her when remembering how disappointed a heart was
near her, how much might at that moment, and at a little distance,
be enduring by the feelings which she had led astray herself.
The difference of Harriet at Mrs. Goddard's, or in London, made perhaps
an unreasonable difference in Emma's sensations; but she could not
think of her in London without objects of curiosity and employment,
which must be averting the past, and carrying her out of herself.
She would not allow any other anxiety to succeed directly to the place
in her mind which Harriet had occupied.  There was a communication
before her, one which she only could be competent to make--
the confession of her engagement to her father; but she would
have nothing to do with it at present.--She had resolved to defer
the disclosure till Mrs. Weston were safe and well.  No additional
agitation should be thrown at this period among those she loved--
and the evil should not act on herself by anticipation before the
appointed time.--A fortnight, at least, of leisure and peace of mind,
to crown every warmer, but more agitating, delight, should be hers.
She soon resolved, equally as a duty and a pleasure, to employ half
an hour of this holiday of spirits in calling on Miss Fairfax.--
She ought to go--and she was longing to see her; the resemblance of
their present situations increasing every other motive of goodwill. 
It would be a secret satisfaction; but the consciousness of a
similarity of prospect would certainly add to the interest with
which she should attend to any thing Jane might communicate.
She went--she had driven once unsuccessfully to the door, but had
not been into the house since the morning after Box Hill, when poor
Jane had been in such distress as had filled her with compassion,
though all the worst of her sufferings had been unsuspected.--
The fear of being still unwelcome, determined her, though assured
of their being at home, to wait in the passage, and send up her name.--
She heard Patty announcing it; but no such bustle succeeded as poor
Miss Bates had before made so happily intelligible.--No; she heard
nothing but the instant reply of, "Beg her to walk up;"--and a moment
afterwards she was met on the stairs by Jane herself, coming eagerly
forward, as if no other reception of her were felt sufficient.--
Emma had never seen her look so well, so lovely, so engaging. 
There was consciousness, animation, and warmth; there was every
thing which her countenance or manner could ever have wanted.--
She came forward with an offered hand; and said, in a low, but very
"This is most kind, indeed!--Miss Woodhouse, it is impossible
for me to express--I hope you will believe--Excuse me for being
Emma was gratified, and would soon have shewn no want of words,
if the sound of Mrs. Elton's voice from the sitting-room had not
checked her, and made it expedient to compress all her friendly
and all her congratulatory sensations into a very, very earnest
Mrs. Bates and Mrs. Elton were together.  Miss Bates was out,
which accounted for the previous tranquillity.  Emma could have
wished Mrs. Elton elsewhere; but she was in a humour to have patience
with every body; and as Mrs. Elton met her with unusual graciousness,
She soon believed herself to penetrate Mrs. Elton's thoughts,
and understand why she was, like herself, in happy spirits;
it was being in Miss Fairfax's confidence, and fancying herself
acquainted with what was still a secret to other people. 
Emma saw symptoms of it immediately in the expression of her face;
and while paying her own compliments to Mrs. Bates, and appearing
to attend to the good old lady's replies, she saw her with a sort
of anxious parade of mystery fold up a letter which she had apparently
been reading aloud to Miss Fairfax, and return it into the purple
and gold reticule by her side, saying, with significant nods,
"We can finish this some other time, you know.  You and I shall
not want opportunities.  And, in fact, you have heard all the
essential already.  I only wanted to prove to you that Mrs. S. admits
our apology, and is not offended.  You see how delightfully
she writes.  Oh! she is a sweet creature!  You would have doated
on her, had you gone.--But not a word more.  Let us be discreet--
quite on our good behaviour.--Hush!--You remember those lines--
Now I say, my dear, in our case, for lady, read----mum! a word
to the wise.--I am in a fine flow of spirits, an't I?  But I want
to set your heart at ease as to Mrs. S.--My representation, you see,
And again, on Emma's merely turning her head to look
at Mrs. Bates's knitting, she added, in a half whisper,
"I mentioned no names, you will observe.--Oh! no; cautious as
a minister of state.  I managed it extremely well."
Emma could not doubt.  It was a palpable display, repeated on every
possible occasion.  When they had all talked a little while in harmony
of the weather and Mrs. Weston, she found herself abruptly addressed with,
"Do not you think, Miss Woodhouse, our saucy little friend here is
charmingly recovered?--Do not you think her cure does Perry the
highest credit?--(here was a side-glance of great meaning at Jane.)
Upon my word, Perry has restored her in a wonderful short time!--
Oh! if you had seen her, as I did, when she was at the worst!"--
And when Mrs. Bates was saying something to Emma, whispered farther,
"We do not say a word of any assistance that Perry might have;
not a word of a certain young physician from Windsor.--Oh! no;
"I have scarce had the pleasure of seeing you, Miss Woodhouse,"
she shortly afterwards began, "since the party to Box Hill. 
Very pleasant party.  But yet I think there was something wanting. 
Things did not seem--that is, there seemed a little cloud upon
the spirits of some.--So it appeared to me at least, but I might
be mistaken.  However, I think it answered so far as to tempt one
to go again.  What say you both to our collecting the same party,
and exploring to Box Hill again, while the fine weather lasts?--
It must be the same party, you know, quite the same party,
Soon after this Miss Bates came in, and Emma could not help being diverted
by the perplexity of her first answer to herself, resulting, she supposed,
from doubt of what might be said, and impatience to say every thing.
"Thank you, dear Miss Woodhouse, you are all kindness.--It is impossible
to say--Yes, indeed, I quite understand--dearest Jane's prospects--
that is, I do not mean.--But she is charmingly recovered.--
How is Mr. Woodhouse?--I am so glad.--Quite out of my power.--
Such a happy little circle as you find us here.--Yes, indeed.--
Charming young man!--that is--so very friendly; I mean good Mr. Perry!--
such attention to Jane!"--And from her great, her more than commonly
thankful delight towards Mrs. Elton for being there, Emma guessed
that there had been a little show of resentment towards Jane,
from the vicarage quarter, which was now graciously overcome.--
After a few whispers, indeed, which placed it beyond a guess,
"Yes, here I am, my good friend; and here I have been so long,
that anywhere else I should think it necessary to apologise;
but, the truth is, that I am waiting for my lord and master. 
He promised to join me here, and pay his respects to you."
"What! are we to have the pleasure of a call from Mr. Elton?--
That will be a favour indeed! for I know gentlemen do not like
morning visits, and Mr. Elton's time is so engaged."
"Upon my word it is, Miss Bates.--He really is engaged from morning
to night.--There is no end of people's coming to him, on some pretence
or other.--The magistrates, and overseers, and churchwardens,
are always wanting his opinion.  They seem not able to do any thing
without him.--`Upon my word, Mr. E.,' I often say, `rather you than I.--
I do not know what would become of my crayons and my instrument,
if I had half so many applicants.'--Bad enough as it is, for I
absolutely neglect them both to an unpardonable degree.--I believe
I have not played a bar this fortnight.--However, he is coming,
I assure you:  yes, indeed, on purpose to wait on you all."  And putting
up her hand to screen her words from Emma--"A congratulatory visit,
"He promised to come to me as soon as he could disengage himself
from Knightley; but he and Knightley are shut up together
in deep consultation.--Mr. E. is Knightley's right hand."
Emma would not have smiled for the world, and only said, "Is Mr. Elton
gone on foot to Donwell?--He will have a hot walk."
"Oh! no, it is a meeting at the Crown, a regular meeting. 
Weston and Cole will be there too; but one is apt to speak only
of those who lead.--I fancy Mr. E. and Knightley have every thing
"Have not you mistaken the day?" said Emma.  "I am almost certain
that the meeting at the Crown is not till to-morrow.--Mr. Knightley
was at Hartfield yesterday, and spoke of it as for Saturday."
"Oh! no, the meeting is certainly to-day," was the abrupt answer,
which denoted the impossibility of any blunder on Mrs. Elton's side.--
"I do believe," she continued, "this is the most troublesome parish
that ever was.  We never heard of such things at Maple Grove."
"Upon my word, my dear, I do not know, for I never heard the subject
"But it is proved by the smallness of the school, which I have heard
you speak of, as under the patronage of your sister and Mrs. Bragge;
the only school, and not more than five-and-twenty children."
"Ah! you clever creature, that's very true.  What a thinking brain
you have!  I say, Jane, what a perfect character you and I should make,
if we could be shaken together.  My liveliness and your solidity
would produce perfection.--Not that I presume to insinuate, however,
that some people may not think you perfection already.--But hush!--
It seemed an unnecessary caution; Jane was wanting to give her words,
not to Mrs. Elton, but to Miss Woodhouse, as the latter plainly saw. 
The wish of distinguishing her, as far as civility permitted,
was very evident, though it could not often proceed beyond a look.
Mr. Elton made his appearance.  His lady greeted him with some
"Very pretty, sir, upon my word; to send me on here, to be an
encumbrance to my friends, so long before you vouchsafe to come!--
But you knew what a dutiful creature you had to deal with. 
You knew I should not stir till my lord and master appeared.--
Here have I been sitting this hour, giving these young ladies
a sample of true conjugal obedience--for who can say, you know,
Mr. Elton was so hot and tired, that all this wit seemed thrown away. 
His civilities to the other ladies must be paid; but his subsequent
object was to lament over himself for the heat he was suffering,
"When I got to Donwell," said he, "Knightley could not be found. 
Very odd! very unaccountable! after the note I sent him this morning,
and the message he returned, that he should certainly be at home
"Donwell!" cried his wife.--"My dear Mr. E., you have not been
to Donwell!--You mean the Crown; you come from the meeting at the Crown."
"No, no, that's to-morrow; and I particularly wanted to see Knightley
to-day on that very account.--Such a dreadful broiling morning!--
I went over the fields too--(speaking in a tone of great ill-usage,)
which made it so much the worse.  And then not to find him at home! 
I assure you I am not at all pleased.  And no apology left, no message
for me.  The housekeeper declared she knew nothing of my being expected.--
Very extraordinary!--And nobody knew at all which way he was gone. 
Perhaps to Hartfield, perhaps to the Abbey Mill, perhaps into his woods.--
Miss Woodhouse, this is not like our friend Knightley!--Can you
Emma amused herself by protesting that it was very extraordinary,
indeed, and that she had not a syllable to say for him.
"I cannot imagine," said Mrs. Elton, (feeling the indignity as a wife
ought to do,) "I cannot imagine how he could do such a thing by you,
of all people in the world!  The very last person whom one should expect
to be forgotten!--My dear Mr. E., he must have left a message for you,
I am sure he must.--Not even Knightley could be so very eccentric;--
and his servants forgot it.  Depend upon it, that was the case: 
and very likely to happen with the Donwell servants, who are all,
I have often observed, extremely awkward and remiss.--I am sure I
would not have such a creature as his Harry stand at our sideboard
for any consideration.  And as for Mrs. Hodges, Wright holds
her very cheap indeed.--She promised Wright a receipt, and never
"I met William Larkins," continued Mr. Elton, "as I got near
the house, and he told me I should not find his master at home,
but I did not believe him.--William seemed rather out of humour. 
He did not know what was come to his master lately, he said, but he
could hardly ever get the speech of him.  I have nothing to do with
William's wants, but it really is of very great importance that I
should see Knightley to-day; and it becomes a matter, therefore,
of very serious inconvenience that I should have had this hot walk
Emma felt that she could not do better than go home directly. 
In all probability she was at this very time waited for there;
and Mr. Knightley might be preserved from sinking deeper in aggression
towards Mr. Elton, if not towards William Larkins.
She was pleased, on taking leave, to find Miss Fairfax determined
to attend her out of the room, to go with her even downstairs;
it gave her an opportunity which she immediately made use of,
"It is as well, perhaps, that I have not had the possibility. 
Had you not been surrounded by other friends, I might have been
tempted to introduce a subject, to ask questions, to speak more
openly than might have been strictly correct.--I feel that I should
"Oh!" cried Jane, with a blush and an hesitation which Emma thought
infinitely more becoming to her than all the elegance of all her
usual composure--"there would have been no danger.  The danger
would have been of my wearying you.  You could not have gratified
me more than by expressing an interest--.  Indeed, Miss Woodhouse,
(speaking more collectedly,) with the consciousness which I
have of misconduct, very great misconduct, it is particularly
consoling to me to know that those of my friends, whose good
opinion is most worth preserving, are not disgusted to such a
degree as to--I have not time for half that I could wish to say. 
I long to make apologies, excuses, to urge something for myself. 
I feel it so very due.  But, unfortunately--in short, if your
"Oh! you are too scrupulous, indeed you are," cried Emma warmly,
and taking her hand.  "You owe me no apologies; and every body to
whom you might be supposed to owe them, is so perfectly satisfied,
"You are very kind, but I know what my manners were to you.--
So cold and artificial!--I had always a part to act.--It was a life
of deceit!--I know that I must have disgusted you."
"Pray say no more.  I feel that all the apologies should be on my side. 
Let us forgive each other at once.  We must do whatever is to be
done quickest, and I think our feelings will lose no time there. 
"And the next news, I suppose, will be, that we are to lose you--
"Oh! as to all that, of course nothing can be thought of yet. 
I am here till claimed by Colonel and Mrs. Campbell."
"Nothing can be actually settled yet, perhaps," replied Emma,
"You are very right; it has been thought of.  And I will own
to you, (I am sure it will be safe), that so far as our living
with Mr. Churchill at Enscombe, it is settled.  There must be
three months, at least, of deep mourning; but when they are over,
I imagine there will be nothing more to wait for."
"Thank you, thank you.--This is just what I wanted to be assured of.--
Oh! if you knew how much I love every thing that is decided and open!--
Mrs. Weston's friends were all made happy by her safety;
and if the satisfaction of her well-doing could be increased
to Emma, it was by knowing her to be the mother of a little girl. 
She had been decided in wishing for a Miss Weston.  She would
not acknowledge that it was with any view of making a match
for her, hereafter, with either of Isabella's sons; but she was
convinced that a daughter would suit both father and mother best. 
It would be a great comfort to Mr. Weston, as he grew older--
and even Mr. Weston might be growing older ten years hence--to have
his fireside enlivened by the sports and the nonsense, the freaks
and the fancies of a child never banished from home; and Mrs. Weston--
no one could doubt that a daughter would be most to her; and it
would be quite a pity that any one who so well knew how to teach,
"She has had the advantage, you know, of practising on me,"
she continued--"like La Baronne d'Almane on La Comtesse d'Ostalis,
in Madame de Genlis' Adelaide and Theodore, and we shall now see
her own little Adelaide educated on a more perfect plan."
"That is," replied Mr. Knightley, "she will indulge her even more
than she did you, and believe that she does not indulge her at all. 
"Poor child!" cried Emma; "at that rate, what will become of her?"
"Nothing very bad.--The fate of thousands.  She will be disagreeable
in infancy, and correct herself as she grows older.  I am losing
all my bitterness against spoilt children, my dearest Emma. 
I, who am owing all my happiness to you, would not it be horrible
Emma laughed, and replied:  "But I had the assistance of all
your endeavours to counteract the indulgence of other people. 
I doubt whether my own sense would have corrected me without it."
"Do you?--I have no doubt.  Nature gave you understanding:--
Miss Taylor gave you principles.  You must have done well. 
My interference was quite as likely to do harm as good.  It was
very natural for you to say, what right has he to lecture me?--
and I am afraid very natural for you to feel that it was done
in a disagreeable manner.  I do not believe I did you any good. 
The good was all to myself, by making you an object of the tenderest
affection to me.  I could not think about you so much without doating
on you, faults and all; and by dint of fancying so many errors,
have been in love with you ever since you were thirteen at least."
"I am sure you were of use to me," cried Emma.  "I was very often
influenced rightly by you--oftener than I would own at the time. 
I am very sure you did me good.  And if poor little Anna Weston is
to be spoiled, it will be the greatest humanity in you to do as much
for her as you have done for me, except falling in love with her
"How often, when you were a girl, have you said to me, with one
of your saucy looks--`Mr. Knightley, I am going to do so-and-so;
papa says I may, or I have Miss Taylor's leave'--something which,
you knew, I did not approve.  In such cases my interference was giving
"What an amiable creature I was!--No wonder you should hold
"`Mr. Knightley.'--You always called me, `Mr. Knightley;' and,
from habit, it has not so very formal a sound.--And yet it is formal. 
I want you to call me something else, but I do not know what."
"I remember once calling you `George,' in one of my amiable fits,
about ten years ago.  I did it because I thought it would offend you;
but, as you made no objection, I never did it again."
"Impossible!--I never can call you any thing but `Mr. Knightley.' 
I will not promise even to equal the elegant terseness of Mrs. Elton,
by calling you Mr. K.--But I will promise," she added presently,
laughing and blushing--"I will promise to call you once by your
Christian name.  I do not say when, but perhaps you may guess
where;--in the building in which N. takes M. for better, for worse."
Emma grieved that she could not be more openly just to one
important service which his better sense would have rendered her,
to the advice which would have saved her from the worst of all
her womanly follies--her wilful intimacy with Harriet Smith;
but it was too tender a subject.--She could not enter on it.--
Harriet was very seldom mentioned between them.  This, on his side,
might merely proceed from her not being thought of; but Emma
was rather inclined to attribute it to delicacy, and a suspicion,
from some appearances, that their friendship were declining. 
She was aware herself, that, parting under any other circumstances,
they certainly should have corresponded more, and that her
intelligence would not have rested, as it now almost wholly did,
on Isabella's letters.  He might observe that it was so.  The pain
of being obliged to practise concealment towards him, was very little
inferior to the pain of having made Harriet unhappy.
Isabella sent quite as good an account of her visitor as could
be expected; on her first arrival she had thought her out of spirits,
which appeared perfectly natural, as there was a dentist to
be consulted; but, since that business had been over, she did not
appear to find Harriet different from what she had known her before.--
Isabella, to be sure, was no very quick observer; yet if Harriet
had not been equal to playing with the children, it would not have
escaped her.  Emma's comforts and hopes were most agreeably carried on,
by Harriet's being to stay longer; her fortnight was likely to be
a month at least.  Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley were to come down
in August, and she was invited to remain till they could bring her back.
"John does not even mention your friend," said Mr. Knightley. 
It was the answer to the communication of his intended marriage. 
Emma accepted it with a very eager hand, with an impatience all alive
to know what he would say about it, and not at all checked by hearing
"John enters like a brother into my happiness," continued Mr. Knightley,
"but he is no complimenter; and though I well know him to have,
likewise, a most brotherly affection for you, he is so far from
making flourishes, that any other young woman might think him rather
cool in her praise.  But I am not afraid of your seeing what he writes."
"He writes like a sensible man," replied Emma, when she had read
the letter.  "I honour his sincerity.  It is very plain that he
considers the good fortune of the engagement as all on my side,
but that he is not without hope of my growing, in time, as worthy
of your affection, as you think me already.  Had he said any thing
to bear a different construction, I should not have believed him."
"My Emma, he means no such thing.  He only means--"
"He and I should differ very little in our estimation of the two,"
interrupted she, with a sort of serious smile--"much less, perhaps,
than he is aware of, if we could enter without ceremony or reserve
"Oh!" she cried with more thorough gaiety, "if you fancy your
brother does not do me justice, only wait till my dear father is in
the secret, and hear his opinion.  Depend upon it, he will be much
farther from doing you justice.  He will think all the happiness,
all the advantage, on your side of the question; all the merit
on mine.  I wish I may not sink into `poor Emma' with him at once.--
His tender compassion towards oppressed worth can go no farther."
"Ah!" he cried, "I wish your father might be half as easily convinced
as John will be, of our having every right that equal worth can give,
to be happy together.  I am amused by one part of John's letter--
did you notice it?--where he says, that my information did not take
him wholly by surprize, that he was rather in expectation of hearing
"If I understand your brother, he only means so far as your having
some thoughts of marrying.  He had no idea of me.  He seems perfectly
"Yes, yes--but I am amused that he should have seen so far into
my feelings.  What has he been judging by?--I am not conscious
of any difference in my spirits or conversation that could prepare
him at this time for my marrying any more than at another.--
But it was so, I suppose.  I dare say there was a difference when I
was staying with them the other day.  I believe I did not play
with the children quite so much as usual.  I remember one evening
the poor boys saying, `Uncle seems always tired now.'"
The time was coming when the news must spread farther, and other persons'
reception of it tried.  As soon as Mrs. Weston was sufficiently
recovered to admit Mr. Woodhouse's visits, Emma having it in view
that her gentle reasonings should be employed in the cause,
resolved first to announce it at home, and then at Randalls.--
But how to break it to her father at last!--She had bound herself
to do it, in such an hour of Mr. Knightley's absence, or when it
came to the point her heart would have failed her, and she must
have put it off; but Mr. Knightley was to come at such a time,
and follow up the beginning she was to make.--She was forced
to speak, and to speak cheerfully too.  She must not make it a more
decided subject of misery to him, by a melancholy tone herself. 
She must not appear to think it a misfortune.--With all the spirits
she could command, she prepared him first for something strange,
and then, in a few words, said, that if his consent and approbation
could be obtained--which, she trusted, would be attended with
no difficulty, since it was a plan to promote the happiness of all--
she and Mr. Knightley meant to marry; by which means Hartfield
would receive the constant addition of that person's company
whom she knew he loved, next to his daughters and Mrs. Weston,
Poor man!--it was at first a considerable shock to him, and he tried
earnestly to dissuade her from it.  She was reminded, more than once,
of having always said she would never marry, and assured that it
would be a great deal better for her to remain single; and told of
poor Isabella, and poor Miss Taylor.--But it would not do.  Emma hung
about him affectionately, and smiled, and said it must be so; and that
he must not class her with Isabella and Mrs. Weston, whose marriages
taking them from Hartfield, had, indeed, made a melancholy change: 
but she was not going from Hartfield; she should be always there;
she was introducing no change in their numbers or their comforts but
for the better; and she was very sure that he would be a great deal
the happier for having Mr. Knightley always at hand, when he were once
got used to the idea.--Did he not love Mr. Knightley very much?--
He would not deny that he did, she was sure.--Whom did he ever want
to consult on business but Mr. Knightley?--Who was so useful to him,
who so ready to write his letters, who so glad to assist him?--
Who so cheerful, so attentive, so attached to him?--Would not he
like to have him always on the spot?--Yes.  That was all very true. 
Mr. Knightley could not be there too often; he should be glad to see
him every day;--but they did see him every day as it was.--Why could
Mr. Woodhouse could not be soon reconciled; but the worst was overcome,
the idea was given; time and continual repetition must do the rest.--
To Emma's entreaties and assurances succeeded Mr. Knightley's,
whose fond praise of her gave the subject even a kind of welcome;
and he was soon used to be talked to by each, on every fair occasion.--
They had all the assistance which Isabella could give, by letters
of the strongest approbation; and Mrs. Weston was ready,
on the first meeting, to consider the subject in the most
serviceable light--first, as a settled, and, secondly, as a good one--
well aware of the nearly equal importance of the two recommendations
to Mr. Woodhouse's mind.--It was agreed upon, as what was to be;
and every body by whom he was used to be guided assuring him that
it would be for his happiness; and having some feelings himself
which almost admitted it, he began to think that some time or other--
in another year or two, perhaps--it might not be so very bad
Mrs. Weston was acting no part, feigning no feelings in all that she
said to him in favour of the event.--She had been extremely surprized,
never more so, than when Emma first opened the affair to her;
but she saw in it only increase of happiness to all, and had
no scruple in urging him to the utmost.--She had such a regard
for Mr. Knightley, as to think he deserved even her dearest Emma;
and it was in every respect so proper, suitable, and unexceptionable
a connexion, and in one respect, one point of the highest importance,
so peculiarly eligible, so singularly fortunate, that now it seemed
as if Emma could not safely have attached herself to any other creature,
and that she had herself been the stupidest of beings in not having
thought of it, and wished it long ago.--How very few of those men
in a rank of life to address Emma would have renounced their own
home for Hartfield!  And who but Mr. Knightley could know and bear
with Mr. Woodhouse, so as to make such an arrangement desirable!--
The difficulty of disposing of poor Mr. Woodhouse had been always
felt in her husband's plans and her own, for a marriage between Frank
and Emma.  How to settle the claims of Enscombe and Hartfield had
been a continual impediment--less acknowledged by Mr. Weston than
by herself--but even he had never been able to finish the subject
better than by saying--"Those matters will take care of themselves;
the young people will find a way."  But here there was nothing to be
shifted off in a wild speculation on the future.  It was all right,
all open, all equal.  No sacrifice on any side worth the name. 
It was a union of the highest promise of felicity in itself,
and without one real, rational difficulty to oppose or delay it.
Mrs. Weston, with her baby on her knee, indulging in such reflections
as these, was one of the happiest women in the world.  If any thing
could increase her delight, it was perceiving that the baby would
The news was universally a surprize wherever it spread;
and Mr. Weston had his five minutes share of it; but five minutes
were enough to familiarise the idea to his quickness of mind.--
He saw the advantages of the match, and rejoiced in them with all
the constancy of his wife; but the wonder of it was very soon nothing;
and by the end of an hour he was not far from believing that he
"It is to be a secret, I conclude," said he.  "These matters are
always a secret, till it is found out that every body knows them. 
Only let me be told when I may speak out.--I wonder whether Jane has
He went to Highbury the next morning, and satisfied himself on
that point.  He told her the news.  Was not she like a daughter,
his eldest daughter?--he must tell her; and Miss Bates being present,
it passed, of course, to Mrs. Cole, Mrs. Perry, and Mrs. Elton,
immediately afterwards.  It was no more than the principals were
prepared for; they had calculated from the time of its being known
at Randalls, how soon it would be over Highbury; and were thinking
of themselves, as the evening wonder in many a family circle,
In general, it was a very well approved match.  Some might think him,
and others might think her, the most in luck.  One set might
recommend their all removing to Donwell, and leaving Hartfield
for the John Knightleys; and another might predict disagreements
among their servants; but yet, upon the whole, there was no serious
objection raised, except in one habitation, the Vicarage.--There,
the surprize was not softened by any satisfaction.  Mr. Elton
cared little about it, compared with his wife; he only hoped "the
young lady's pride would now be contented;" and supposed "she had
always meant to catch Knightley if she could;" and, on the point
of living at Hartfield, could daringly exclaim, "Rather he than I!"--
But Mrs. Elton was very much discomposed indeed.--"Poor Knightley!
poor fellow!--sad business for him.--She was extremely concerned;
for, though very eccentric, he had a thousand good qualities.--
How could he be so taken in?--Did not think him at all in love--
not in the least.--Poor Knightley!--There would be an end of all
pleasant intercourse with him.--How happy he had been to come and dine
with them whenever they asked him!  But that would be all over now.--
Poor fellow!--No more exploring parties to Donwell made for her. 
Oh! no; there would be a Mrs. Knightley to throw cold water on
every thing.--Extremely disagreeable!  But she was not at all sorry
that she had abused the housekeeper the other day.--Shocking plan,
living together.  It would never do.  She knew a family near Maple
Grove who had tried it, and been obliged to separate before the end
Time passed on.  A few more to-morrows, and the party from London
would be arriving.  It was an alarming change; and Emma was thinking
of it one morning, as what must bring a great deal to agitate and
grieve her, when Mr. Knightley came in, and distressing thoughts
were put by.  After the first chat of pleasure he was silent;
"Good or bad?" said she, quickly, looking up in his face.
"Oh! good I am sure.--I see it in your countenance.  You are trying
"I am afraid," said he, composing his features, "I am very much afraid,
my dear Emma, that you will not smile when you hear it."
"Indeed! but why so?--I can hardly imagine that any thing which
pleases or amuses you, should not please and amuse me too."
"There is one subject," he replied, "I hope but one, on which
we do not think alike."  He paused a moment, again smiling,
with his eyes fixed on her face.  "Does nothing occur to you?--
Her cheeks flushed at the name, and she felt afraid of something,
"Have you heard from her yourself this morning?" cried he. 
"You are prepared for the worst, I see--and very bad it is. 
Emma gave a start, which did not seem like being prepared--
and her eyes, in eager gaze, said, "No, this is impossible!"
"It is so, indeed," continued Mr. Knightley; "I have it from Robert
Martin himself.  He left me not half an hour ago."
She was still looking at him with the most speaking amazement.
"You like it, my Emma, as little as I feared.--I wish our opinions were
the same.  But in time they will.  Time, you may be sure, will make
one or the other of us think differently; and, in the meanwhile,
"You mistake me, you quite mistake me," she replied, exerting herself. 
"It is not that such a circumstance would now make me unhappy,
but I cannot believe it.  It seems an impossibility!--You cannot mean
to say, that Harriet Smith has accepted Robert Martin.  You cannot
mean that he has even proposed to her again--yet.  You only mean,
"I mean that he has done it," answered Mr. Knightley, with smiling
"Good God!" she cried.--"Well!"--Then having recourse to her workbasket,
in excuse for leaning down her face, and concealing all the
exquisite feelings of delight and entertainment which she knew she
must be expressing, she added, "Well, now tell me every thing;
make this intelligible to me.  How, where, when?--Let me know it all. 
I never was more surprized--but it does not make me unhappy,
"It is a very simple story.  He went to town on business three days ago,
and I got him to take charge of some papers which I was wanting
to send to John.--He delivered these papers to John, at his chambers,
and was asked by him to join their party the same evening to Astley's.
They were going to take the two eldest boys to Astley's. The party
was to be our brother and sister, Henry, John--and Miss Smith. 
My friend Robert could not resist.  They called for him in their way;
were all extremely amused; and my brother asked him to dine with
them the next day--which he did--and in the course of that visit
(as I understand) he found an opportunity of speaking to Harriet;
and certainly did not speak in vain.--She made him, by her acceptance,
as happy even as he is deserving.  He came down by yesterday's coach,
and was with me this morning immediately after breakfast, to report
his proceedings, first on my affairs, and then on his own. 
This is all that I can relate of the how, where, and when. 
Your friend Harriet will make a much longer history when you see her.--
She will give you all the minute particulars, which only woman's
language can make interesting.--In our communications we deal only
in the great.--However, I must say, that Robert Martin's heart seemed
for him, and to me, very overflowing; and that he did mention,
without its being much to the purpose, that on quitting their
box at Astley's, my brother took charge of Mrs. John Knightley
and little John, and he followed with Miss Smith and Henry;
and that at one time they were in such a crowd, as to make Miss Smith
He stopped.--Emma dared not attempt any immediate reply.  To speak,
she was sure would be to betray a most unreasonable degree
of happiness.  She must wait a moment, or he would think her mad. 
Her silence disturbed him; and after observing her a little while,
"Emma, my love, you said that this circumstance would not now make
you unhappy; but I am afraid it gives you more pain than you expected. 
His situation is an evil--but you must consider it as what satisfies
your friend; and I will answer for your thinking better and better
of him as you know him more.  His good sense and good principles would
delight you.--As far as the man is concerned, you could not wish your
friend in better hands.  His rank in society I would alter if I could,
which is saying a great deal I assure you, Emma.--You laugh at me
about William Larkins; but I could quite as ill spare Robert Martin."
He wanted her to look up and smile; and having now brought herself
not to smile too broadly--she did--cheerfully answering,
"You need not be at any pains to reconcile me to the match.  I think
Harriet is doing extremely well.  Her connexions may be worse than his. 
In respectability of character, there can be no doubt that they are. 
I have been silent from surprize merely, excessive surprize. 
You cannot imagine how suddenly it has come on me! how peculiarly
unprepared I was!--for I had reason to believe her very lately more
determined against him, much more, than she was before."
"You ought to know your friend best," replied Mr. Knightley;
"but I should say she was a good-tempered, soft-hearted girl,
not likely to be very, very determined against any young man who told
Emma could not help laughing as she answered, "Upon my word,
I believe you know her quite as well as I do.--But, Mr. Knightley,
are you perfectly sure that she has absolutely and downright
accepted him.  I could suppose she might in time--but can she already?--
Did not you misunderstand him?--You were both talking of other things;
of business, shows of cattle, or new drills--and might not you,
in the confusion of so many subjects, mistake him?--It was not
Harriet's hand that he was certain of--it was the dimensions of some
The contrast between the countenance and air of Mr. Knightley and
Robert Martin was, at this moment, so strong to Emma's feelings,
and so strong was the recollection of all that had so recently
passed on Harriet's side, so fresh the sound of those words,
spoken with such emphasis, "No, I hope I know better than to think
of Robert Martin," that she was really expecting the intelligence
to prove, in some measure, premature.  It could not be otherwise.
"Do you dare say this?" cried Mr. Knightley.  "Do you dare to suppose
me so great a blockhead, as not to know what a man is talking of?--
"Oh!  I always deserve the best treatment, because I never put
up with any other; and, therefore, you must give me a plain,
direct answer.  Are you quite sure that you understand the terms
"I am quite sure," he replied, speaking very distinctly, "that he
told me she had accepted him; and that there was no obscurity,
nothing doubtful, in the words he used; and I think I can give you
a proof that it must be so.  He asked my opinion as to what he
was now to do.  He knew of no one but Mrs. Goddard to whom he
could apply for information of her relations or friends.  Could I
mention any thing more fit to be done, than to go to Mrs. Goddard? 
I assured him that I could not.  Then, he said, he would endeavour
"I am perfectly satisfied," replied Emma, with the brightest smiles,
"You are materially changed since we talked on this subject before."
"And I am changed also; for I am now very willing to grant you all
Harriet's good qualities.  I have taken some pains for your sake,
and for Robert Martin's sake, (whom I have always had reason to believe
as much in love with her as ever,) to get acquainted with her. 
I have often talked to her a good deal.  You must have seen that
I did.  Sometimes, indeed, I have thought you were half suspecting me
of pleading poor Martin's cause, which was never the case; but, from all
my observations, I am convinced of her being an artless, amiable girl,
with very good notions, very seriously good principles, and placing
her happiness in the affections and utility of domestic life.--
Much of this, I have no doubt, she may thank you for."
"Me!" cried Emma, shaking her head.--"Ah! poor Harriet!"
She checked herself, however, and submitted quietly to a little
Their conversation was soon afterwards closed by the entrance of
her father.  She was not sorry.  She wanted to be alone.  Her mind
was in a state of flutter and wonder, which made it impossible for her
to be collected.  She was in dancing, singing, exclaiming spirits;
and till she had moved about, and talked to herself, and laughed
and reflected, she could be fit for nothing rational.
Her father's business was to announce James's being gone out to put
the horses to, preparatory to their now daily drive to Randalls;
and she had, therefore, an immediate excuse for disappearing.
The joy, the gratitude, the exquisite delight of her sensations
may be imagined.  The sole grievance and alloy thus removed in the
prospect of Harriet's welfare, she was really in danger of becoming
too happy for security.--What had she to wish for?  Nothing, but to
grow more worthy of him, whose intentions and judgment had been
ever so superior to her own.  Nothing, but that the lessons
of her past folly might teach her humility and circumspection in future.
Serious she was, very serious in her thankfulness, and in her resolutions;
and yet there was no preventing a laugh, sometimes in the very midst
of them.  She must laugh at such a close!  Such an end of the doleful
disappointment of five weeks back!  Such a heart--such a Harriet!
Now there would be pleasure in her returning--Every thing would
be a pleasure.  It would be a great pleasure to know Robert Martin.
High in the rank of her most serious and heartfelt felicities,
was the reflection that all necessity of concealment from
Mr. Knightley would soon be over.  The disguise, equivocation,
mystery, so hateful to her to practise, might soon be over. 
She could now look forward to giving him that full and perfect
confidence which her disposition was most ready to welcome as a duty.
In the gayest and happiest spirits she set forward with her father;
not always listening, but always agreeing to what he said;
and, whether in speech or silence, conniving at the comfortable
persuasion of his being obliged to go to Randalls every day,
They arrived.--Mrs. Weston was alone in the drawing-room:--
but hardly had they been told of the baby, and Mr. Woodhouse
received the thanks for coming, which he asked for, when a glimpse
was caught through the blind, of two figures passing near the window.
"It is Frank and Miss Fairfax," said Mrs. Weston.  "I was just
going to tell you of our agreeable surprize in seeing him arrive
this morning.  He stays till to-morrow, and Miss Fairfax has been
persuaded to spend the day with us.--They are coming in, I hope."
In half a minute they were in the room.  Emma was extremely glad
to see him--but there was a degree of confusion--a number of
embarrassing recollections on each side.  They met readily and smiling,
but with a consciousness which at first allowed little to be said;
and having all sat down again, there was for some time such a blank
in the circle, that Emma began to doubt whether the wish now indulged,
which she had long felt, of seeing Frank Churchill once more,
and of seeing him with Jane, would yield its proportion of pleasure. 
When Mr. Weston joined the party, however, and when the baby
was fetched, there was no longer a want of subject or animation--
or of courage and opportunity for Frank Churchill to draw near her
"I have to thank you, Miss Woodhouse, for a very kind forgiving
message in one of Mrs. Weston's letters.  I hope time has not made
you less willing to pardon.  I hope you do not retract what you
"No, indeed," cried Emma, most happy to begin, "not in the least. 
I am particularly glad to see and shake hands with you--and to give
He thanked her with all his heart, and continued some time to speak
with serious feeling of his gratitude and happiness.
"Is not she looking well?" said he, turning his eyes towards Jane. 
"Better than she ever used to do?--You see how my father and
But his spirits were soon rising again, and with laughing eyes,
after mentioning the expected return of the Campbells, he named
the name of Dixon.--Emma blushed, and forbade its being pronounced
"I can never think of it," she cried, "without extreme shame."
"The shame," he answered, "is all mine, or ought to be.  But is it
possible that you had no suspicion?--I mean of late.  Early, I know,
"That appears quite wonderful.  I was once very near--and I wish I had--
it would have been better.  But though I was always doing wrong things,
they were very bad wrong things, and such as did me no service.--
It would have been a much better transgression had I broken the bond
"I have some hope," resumed he, "of my uncle's being persuaded
to pay a visit at Randalls; he wants to be introduced to her. 
When the Campbells are returned, we shall meet them in London,
and continue there, I trust, till we may carry her northward.--But now,
I am at such a distance from her--is not it hard, Miss Woodhouse?--
Till this morning, we have not once met since the day of reconciliation. 
Emma spoke her pity so very kindly, that with a sudden accession
"Ah! by the bye," then sinking his voice, and looking demure for
the moment--"I hope Mr. Knightley is well?"  He paused.--She coloured
and laughed.--"I know you saw my letter, and think you may remember
my wish in your favour.  Let me return your congratulations.--
I assure you that I have heard the news with the warmest interest
and satisfaction.--He is a man whom I cannot presume to praise."
Emma was delighted, and only wanted him to go on in the same style;
but his mind was the next moment in his own concerns and with his
"Did you ever see such a skin?--such smoothness! such delicacy!--
and yet without being actually fair.--One cannot call her fair. 
It is a most uncommon complexion, with her dark eye-lashes and hair--
a most distinguishing complexion!  So peculiarly the lady in it.--
"I have always admired her complexion," replied Emma, archly; "but do not
I remember the time when you found fault with her for being so pale?--
When we first began to talk of her.--Have you quite forgotten?"
"Oh! no--what an impudent dog I was!--How could I dare--"
But he laughed so heartily at the recollection, that Emma could
"I do suspect that in the midst of your perplexities at that time,
you had very great amusement in tricking us all.--I am sure you had.--
"Oh! no, no, no--how can you suspect me of such a thing? 
"Not quite so miserable as to be insensible to mirth.  I am sure it
was a source of high entertainment to you, to feel that you were taking
us all in.--Perhaps I am the readier to suspect, because, to tell
you the truth, I think it might have been some amusement to myself
in the same situation.  I think there is a little likeness between us."
"If not in our dispositions," she presently added, with a look of
true sensibility, "there is a likeness in our destiny; the destiny
which bids fair to connect us with two characters so much superior
"True, true," he answered, warmly.  "No, not true on your side.  You can
have no superior, but most true on mine.--She is a complete angel. 
Look at her.  Is not she an angel in every gesture?  Observe the turn
of her throat.  Observe her eyes, as she is looking up at my father.--
You will be glad to hear (inclining his head, and whispering seriously)
that my uncle means to give her all my aunt's jewels.  They are to be
new set.  I am resolved to have some in an ornament for the head. 
"Very beautiful, indeed," replied Emma; and she spoke so kindly,
"How delighted I am to see you again! and to see you in such
excellent looks!--I would not have missed this meeting for the world. 
I should certainly have called at Hartfield, had you failed to come."
The others had been talking of the child, Mrs. Weston giving an
account of a little alarm she had been under, the evening before,
from the infant's appearing not quite well.  She believed she had
been foolish, but it had alarmed her, and she had been within half
a minute of sending for Mr. Perry.  Perhaps she ought to be ashamed,
but Mr. Weston had been almost as uneasy as herself.--In ten minutes,
however, the child had been perfectly well again.  This was
her history; and particularly interesting it was to Mr. Woodhouse,
who commended her very much for thinking of sending for Perry,
and only regretted that she had not done it.  "She should always send
for Perry, if the child appeared in the slightest degree disordered,
were it only for a moment.  She could not be too soon alarmed,
nor send for Perry too often.  It was a pity, perhaps, that he
had not come last night; for, though the child seemed well now,
very well considering, it would probably have been better if Perry
"Perry!" said he to Emma, and trying, as he spoke, to catch Miss
Fairfax's eye.  "My friend Mr. Perry!  What are they saying
about Mr. Perry?--Has he been here this morning?--And how does
Emma soon recollected, and understood him; and while she joined
in the laugh, it was evident from Jane's countenance that she
too was really hearing him, though trying to seem deaf.
"Such an extraordinary dream of mine!" he cried.  "I can never think
of it without laughing.--She hears us, she hears us, Miss Woodhouse. 
I see it in her cheek, her smile, her vain attempt to frown. 
Look at her.  Do not you see that, at this instant, the very passage
of her own letter, which sent me the report, is passing under her eye--
that the whole blunder is spread before her--that she can attend to
nothing else, though pretending to listen to the others?"
Jane was forced to smile completely, for a moment; and the smile
partly remained as she turned towards him, and said in a conscious,
"How you can bear such recollections, is astonishing to me!--
They will sometimes obtrude--but how you can court them!"
He had a great deal to say in return, and very entertainingly;
but Emma's feelings were chiefly with Jane, in the argument; and on
leaving Randalls, and falling naturally into a comparison of the two men,
she felt, that pleased as she had been to see Frank Churchill,
and really regarding him as she did with friendship, she had never
been more sensible of Mr. Knightley's high superiority of character. 
The happiness of this most happy day, received its completion, in the
animated contemplation of his worth which this comparison produced.
If Emma had still, at intervals, an anxious feeling for Harriet,
a momentary doubt of its being possible for her to be really cured
of her attachment to Mr. Knightley, and really able to accept
another man from unbiased inclination, it was not long that she
had to suffer from the recurrence of any such uncertainty. 
A very few days brought the party from London, and she had no
sooner an opportunity of being one hour alone with Harriet,
than she became perfectly satisfied--unaccountable as it was!--
that Robert Martin had thoroughly supplanted Mr. Knightley,
Harriet was a little distressed--did look a little foolish at first: 
but having once owned that she had been presumptuous and silly,
and self-deceived, before, her pain and confusion seemed to die
away with the words, and leave her without a care for the past,
and with the fullest exultation in the present and future; for, as to
her friend's approbation, Emma had instantly removed every fear of
that nature, by meeting her with the most unqualified congratulations.--
Harriet was most happy to give every particular of the evening at
Astley's, and the dinner the next day; she could dwell on it all
with the utmost delight.  But what did such particulars explain?--
The fact was, as Emma could now acknowledge, that Harriet had
always liked Robert Martin; and that his continuing to love her had
been irresistible.--Beyond this, it must ever be unintelligible
The event, however, was most joyful; and every day was giving her
fresh reason for thinking so.--Harriet's parentage became known. 
She proved to be the daughter of a tradesman, rich enough to afford
her the comfortable maintenance which had ever been hers, and decent
enough to have always wished for concealment.--Such was the blood
of gentility which Emma had formerly been so ready to vouch for!--
It was likely to be as untainted, perhaps, as the blood of many
a gentleman:  but what a connexion had she been preparing for
Mr. Knightley--or for the Churchills--or even for Mr. Elton!--
The stain of illegitimacy, unbleached by nobility or wealth,
No objection was raised on the father's side; the young man was
treated liberally; it was all as it should be:  and as Emma became
acquainted with Robert Martin, who was now introduced at Hartfield,
she fully acknowledged in him all the appearance of sense and worth
which could bid fairest for her little friend.  She had no doubt
of Harriet's happiness with any good-tempered man; but with him,
and in the home he offered, there would be the hope of more,
of security, stability, and improvement.  She would be placed in the
midst of those who loved her, and who had better sense than herself;
retired enough for safety, and occupied enough for cheerfulness. 
She would be never led into temptation, nor left for it to find her out. 
She would be respectable and happy; and Emma admitted her to be
the luckiest creature in the world, to have created so steady and
persevering an affection in such a man;--or, if not quite the luckiest,
Harriet, necessarily drawn away by her engagements with the Martins,
was less and less at Hartfield; which was not to be regretted.--
The intimacy between her and Emma must sink; their friendship must
change into a calmer sort of goodwill; and, fortunately, what ought
to be, and must be, seemed already beginning, and in the most gradual,
Before the end of September, Emma attended Harriet to church, and saw
her hand bestowed on Robert Martin with so complete a satisfaction,
as no remembrances, even connected with Mr. Elton as he stood
before them, could impair.--Perhaps, indeed, at that time she
scarcely saw Mr. Elton, but as the clergyman whose blessing at the
altar might next fall on herself.--Robert Martin and Harriet Smith,
the latest couple engaged of the three, were the first to be married.
Jane Fairfax had already quitted Highbury, and was restored to the
comforts of her beloved home with the Campbells.--The Mr. Churchills
were also in town; and they were only waiting for November.
The intermediate month was the one fixed on, as far as they dared,
by Emma and Mr. Knightley.--They had determined that their marriage
ought to be concluded while John and Isabella were still at Hartfield,
to allow them the fortnight's absence in a tour to the seaside,
which was the plan.--John and Isabella, and every other friend,
were agreed in approving it.  But Mr. Woodhouse--how was Mr. Woodhouse
to be induced to consent?--he, who had never yet alluded to their
When first sounded on the subject, he was so miserable, that they
were almost hopeless.--A second allusion, indeed, gave less pain.--
He began to think it was to be, and that he could not prevent it--
a very promising step of the mind on its way to resignation. 
Still, however, he was not happy.  Nay, he appeared so much otherwise,
that his daughter's courage failed.  She could not bear to see
him suffering, to know him fancying himself neglected; and though
her understanding almost acquiesced in the assurance of both the
Mr. Knightleys, that when once the event were over, his distress
would be soon over too, she hesitated--she could not proceed.
In this state of suspense they were befriended, not by any sudden
illumination of Mr. Woodhouse's mind, or any wonderful change of his
nervous system, but by the operation of the same system in another way.--
Mrs. Weston's poultry-house was robbed one night of all her turkeys--
evidently by the ingenuity of man.  Other poultry-yards in the
neighbourhood also suffered.--Pilfering was housebreaking to
Mr. Woodhouse's fears.--He was very uneasy; and but for the sense
of his son-in-law's protection, would have been under wretched alarm
every night of his life.  The strength, resolution, and presence
of mind of the Mr. Knightleys, commanded his fullest dependence. 
While either of them protected him and his, Hartfield was safe.--
But Mr. John Knightley must be in London again by the end of the
The result of this distress was, that, with a much more voluntary,
cheerful consent than his daughter had ever presumed to hope for at
the moment, she was able to fix her wedding-day--and Mr. Elton was
called on, within a month from the marriage of Mr. and Mrs. Robert
Martin, to join the hands of Mr. Knightley and Miss Woodhouse.
The wedding was very much like other weddings, where the parties
have no taste for finery or parade; and Mrs. Elton, from the
particulars detailed by her husband, thought it all extremely shabby,
and very inferior to her own.--"Very little white satin, very few
lace veils; a most pitiful business!--Selina would stare when she
heard of it."--But, in spite of these deficiencies, the wishes,
the hopes, the confidence, the predictions of the small band
of true friends who witnessed the ceremony, were fully answered
                    REFLECTIONS ON THE REVOLUTION IN FRANCE
    IT MAY NOT BE UNNECESSARY to inform the reader that the
following Reflections had their origin in a correspondence between the
Author and a very young gentleman at Paris, who did him the honor of
desiring his opinion upon the important transactions which then, and
ever since, have so much occupied the attention of all men. An
answer was written some time in the month of October 1789, but it
was kept back upon prudential considerations. That letter is alluded
to in the beginning of the following sheets. It has been since
forwarded to the person to whom it was addressed. The reasons for
the delay in sending it were assigned in a short letter to the same
gentleman. This produced on his part a new and pressing application
    The Author began a second and more full discussion on the subject.
This he had some thoughts of publishing early in the last spring; but,
the matter gaining upon him, he found that what he had undertaken
not only far exceeded the measure of a letter, but that its importance
required rather a more detailed consideration than at that time he had
any leisure to bestow upon it. However, having thrown down his first
thoughts in the form of a letter, and, indeed, when he sat down to
write, having intended it for a private letter, he found it difficult
to change the form of address when his sentiments had grown into a
greater extent and had received another direction. A different plan,
he is sensible, might be more favorable to a commodious division and
    You are pleased to call again, and with some earnestness, for my
thoughts on the late proceedings in France. I will not give you reason
to imagine that I think my sentiments of such value as to wish
myself to be solicited about them. They are of too little
consequence to be very anxiously either communicated or withheld. It
was from attention to you, and to you only, that I hesitated at the
time when you first desired to receive them. In the first letter I had
the honor to write to you, and which at length I send, I wrote neither
for, nor from, any description of men, nor shall I in this. My errors,
if any, are my own. My reputation alone is to answer for them.
    You see, Sir, by the long letter I have transmitted to you, that
though I do most heartily wish that France may be animated by a spirit
of rational liberty, and that I think you bound, in all honest policy,
to provide a permanent body in which that spirit may reside, and an
effectual organ by which it may act, it is my misfortune to
entertain great doubts concerning several material points in your late
    YOU IMAGINED, WHEN YOU WROTE LAST, that I might possibly be
reckoned among the approvers of certain proceedings in France, from
the solemn public seal of sanction they have received from two clubs
of gentlemen in London, called the Constitutional Society and the
    I certainly have the honor to belong to more clubs than one, in
which the constitution of this kingdom and the principles of the
glorious Revolution are held in high reverence, and I reckon myself
among the most forward in my zeal for maintaining that constitution
and those principles in their utmost purity and vigor. It is because I
do so, that I think it necessary for me that there should be no
mistake. Those who cultivate the memory of our Revolution and those
who are attached to the constitution of this kingdom will take good
care how they are involved with persons who, under the pretext of zeal
toward the Revolution and constitution, too frequently wander from
their true principles and are ready on every occasion to depart from
the firm but cautious and deliberate spirit which produced the one,
and which presides in the other. Before I proceed to answer the more
material particulars in your letter, I shall beg leave to give you
such information as I have been able to obtain of the two clubs
which have thought proper, as bodies, to interfere in the concerns
of France, first assuring you that I am not, and that I have never
    The first, calling itself the Constitutional Society, or Society
for Constitutional Information, or by some such title, is, I
believe, of seven or eight years standing. The institution of this
society appears to be of a charitable and so far of a laudable nature;
it was intended for the circulation, at the expense of the members, of
many books which few others would be at the expense of buying, and
which might lie on the hands of the booksellers, to the great loss
of an useful body of men. Whether the books, so charitably circulated,
were ever as charitably read is more than I know. Possibly several
of them have been exported to France and, like goods not in request
here, may with you have found a market. I have heard much talk of
the lights to be drawn from books that are sent from hence. What
improvements they have had in their passage (as it is said some
liquors are meliorated by crossing the sea) I cannot tell; but I never
heard a man of common judgment or the least degree of information
speak a word in praise of the greater part of the publications
circulated by that society, nor have their proceedings been accounted,
except by some of themselves, as of any serious consequence.
    Your National Assembly seems to entertain much the same opinion
that I do of this poor charitable club. As a nation, you reserved
the whole stock of your eloquent acknowledgments for the Revolution
Society, when their fellows in the Constitutional were, in equity,
entitled to some share. Since you have selected the Revolution Society
as the great object of your national thanks and praises, you will
think me excusable in making its late conduct the subject of my
observations. The National Assembly of France has given importance
to these gentlemen by adopting them; and they return the favor by
acting as a committee in England for extending the principles of the
National Assembly. Henceforward we must consider them as a kind of
privileged persons, as no inconsiderable members in the diplomatic
body. This is one among the revolutions which have given splendor to
obscurity, and distinction to undiscerned merit. Until very lately I
do not recollect to have heard of this club. I am quite sure that it
never occupied a moment of my thoughts, nor, I believe, those of any
person out of their own set. I find, upon inquiry, that on the
anniversary of the Revolution in 1688, a club of dissenters, but of
what denomination I know not, have long had the custom of hearing a
sermon in one of their churches; and that afterwards they spent the
day cheerfully, as other clubs do, at the tavern. But I never heard
that any public measure or political system, much less that the merits
of the constitution of any foreign nation, had been the subject of a
formal proceeding at their festivals, until, to my inexpressible
surprise, I found them in a sort of public capacity, by a
congratulatory address, giving an authoritative sanction to the
    In the ancient principles and conduct of the club, so far at least
as they were declared, I see nothing to which I could take
exception. I think it very probable that for some purpose new
members may have entered among them, and that some truly Christian
politicians, who love to dispense benefits but are careful to
conceal the hand which distributes the dole, may have made them the
instruments of their pious designs. Whatever I may have reason to
suspect concerning private management, I shall speak of nothing as
    For one, I should be sorry to be thought, directly or
indirectly, concerned in their proceedings. I certainly take my full
share, along with the rest of the world, in my individual and
private capacity, in speculating on what has been done or is doing
on the public stage in any place ancient or modern; in the republic of
Rome or the republic of Paris; but having no general apostolical
mission, being a citizen of a particular state and being bound up,
in a considerable degree, by its public will, I should think it at
least improper and irregular for me to open a formal public
correspondence with the actual government of a foreign nation, without
the express authority of the government under which I live.
    I should be still more unwilling to enter into that correspondence
under anything like an equivocal description, which to many,
unacquainted with our usages, might make the address, in which I
joined, appear as the act of persons in some sort of corporate
capacity acknowledged by the laws of this kingdom and authorized to
speak the sense of some part of it. On account of the ambiguity and
uncertainty of unauthorized general descriptions, and of the deceit
which may be practiced under them, and not from mere formality, the
House of Commons would reject the most sneaking petition for the
most trifling object, under that mode of signature to which you have
thrown open the folding doors of your presence chamber, and have
ushered into your National Assembly with as much ceremony and
parade, and with as great a bustle of applause, as if you have been
visited by the whole representative majesty of the whole English
nation. If what this society has thought proper to send forth had been
a piece of argument, it would have signified little whose argument
it was. It would be neither the more nor the less convincing on
account of the party it came from. But this is only a vote and
resolution. It stands solely on authority; and in this case it is
the mere authority of individuals, few of whom appear. Their
signatures ought, in my opinion, to have been annexed to their
instrument. The world would then have the means of knowing how many
they are; who they are; and of what value their opinions may be,
from their personal abilities, from their knowledge, their experience,
or their lead and authority in this state. To me, who am but a plain
man, the proceeding looks a little too refined and too ingenious; it
has too much the air of a political strategem adopted for the sake
of giving, under a high-sounding name, an importance to the public
declarations of this club which, when the matter came to be closely
inspected, they did not altogether so well deserve. It is a policy
    I flatter myself that I love a manly, moral, regulated liberty
as well as any gentleman of that society, be he who he will; and
perhaps I have given as good proofs of my attachment to that cause
in the whole course of my public conduct. I think I envy liberty as
little as they do to any other nation. But I cannot stand forward
and give praise or blame to anything which relates to human actions,
and human concerns, on a simple view of the object, as it stands
stripped of every relation, in all the nakedness and solitude of
metaphysical abstraction. Circumstances (which with some gentlemen
pass for nothing) give in reality to every political principle its
distinguishing color and discriminating effect. The circumstances
are what render every civil and political scheme beneficial or noxious
to mankind. Abstractedly speaking, government, as well as liberty,
is good; yet could I, in common sense, ten years ago, have felicitated
France on her enjoyment of a government (for she then had a
government) without inquiry what the nature of that government was, or
how it was administered? Can I now congratulate the same nation upon
its freedom? Is it because liberty in the abstract may be classed
amongst the blessings of mankind, that I am seriously to felicitate
a madman, who has escaped from the protecting restraint and
wholesome darkness of his cell, on his restoration to the enjoyment of
light and liberty? Am I to congratulate a highwayman and murderer
who has broke prison upon the recovery of his natural rights? This
would be to act over again the scene of the criminals condemned to the
galleys, and their heroic deliverer, the metaphysic Knight of the
    When I see the spirit of liberty in action, I see a strong
principle at work; and this, for a while, is all I can possibly know
of it. The wild gas, the fixed air, is plainly broke loose; but we
ought to suspend our judgment until the first effervescence is a
little subsided, till the liquor is cleared, and until we see
something deeper than the agitation of a troubled and frothy
surface. I must be tolerably sure, before I venture publicly to
congratulate men upon a blessing, that they have really received
one. Flattery corrupts both the receiver and the giver, and
adulation is not of more service to the people than to kings. I
should, therefore, suspend my congratulations on the new liberty of
France until I was informed how it had been combined with
government, with public force, with the discipline and obedience of
armies, with the collection of an effective and well-distributed
revenue, with morality and religion, with the solidity of property,
with peace and order, with civil and social manners. All these (in
their way) are good things, too, and without them liberty is not a
benefit whilst it lasts, and is not likely to continue long. The
effect of liberty to individuals is that they may do what they please;
we ought to see what it will please them to do, before we risk
congratulations which may be soon turned into complaints. Prudence
would dictate this in the case of separate, insulated, private men,
but liberty, when men act in bodies, is power. Considerate people,
before they declare themselves, will observe the use which is made
of power and particularly of so trying a thing as new power in new
persons of whose principles, tempers, and dispositions they have
little or no experience, and in situations where those who appear
the most stirring in the scene may possibly not be the real movers.
    ALL these considerations, however, were below the transcendental
dignity of the Revolution Society. Whilst I continued in the
country, from whence I had the honor of writing to you, I had but an
imperfect idea of their transactions. On my coming to town, I sent for
an account of their proceedings, which had been published by their
authority, containing a sermon of Dr. Price, with the Duke de
Rochefoucault's and the Archbishop of Aix's letter, and several
other documents annexed. The whole of that publication, with the
manifest design of connecting the affairs of France with those of
England by drawing us into an imitation of the conduct of the National
Assembly, gave me a considerable degree of uneasiness. The effect of
that conduct upon the power, credit, prosperity, and tranquility of
France became every day more evident. The form of constitution to be
settled for its future polity became more clear. We are now in a
condition to discern, with tolerable exactness, the true nature of the
object held up to our imitation. If the prudence of reserve and
decorum dictates silence in some circumstances, in others prudence
of a higher order may justify us in speaking our thoughts. The
beginnings of confusion with us in England are at present feeble
enough, but, with you, we have seen an infancy still more feeble
growing by moments into a strength to heap mountains upon mountains
and to wage war with heaven itself. Whenever our neighbor's house is
on fire, it cannot be amiss for the engines to play a little on our
own. Better to be despised for too anxious apprehensions than ruined
    Solicitous chiefly for the peace of my own country, but by no
means unconcerned for yours, I wish to communicate more largely what
was at first intended only for your private satisfaction. I shall
still keep your affairs in my eye and continue to address myself to
you. Indulging myself in the freedom of epistolary intercourse, I
beg leave to throw out my thoughts and express my feelings just as
they arise in my mind, with very little attention to formal method.
I set out with the proceedings of the Revolution Society, but I
shall not confine myself to them. Is it possible I should? It
appears to me as if I were in a great crisis, not of the affairs of
France alone, but of all Europe, perhaps of more than Europe. All
circumstances taken together, the French revolution is the most
astonishing that has hitherto happened in the world. The most
wonderful things are brought about, in many instances by means the
most absurd and ridiculous, in the most ridiculous modes, and
apparently by the most contemptible instruments. Everything seems
out of nature in this strange chaos of levity and ferocity, and of all
sorts of crimes jumbled together with all sorts of follies. In viewing
this monstrous tragicomic scene, the most opposite passions
necessarily succeed and sometimes mix with each other in the mind:
alternate contempt and indignation, alternate laughter and tears,
    It cannot, however, be denied that to some this strange scene
appeared in quite another point of view. Into them it inspired no
other sentiments than those of exultation and rapture. They saw
nothing in what has been done in France but a firm and temperate
exertion of freedom, so consistent, on the whole, with morals and with
piety as to make it deserving not only of the secular applause of
dashing Machiavellian politicians, but to render it a fit theme for
    On the forenoon of the fourth of November last, Doctor Richard
Price, a non-conforming minister of eminence, preached, at the
dissenting meeting house of the Old Jewry, to his club or society, a
very extraordinary miscellaneous sermon, in which there are some
good moral and religious sentiments, and not ill expressed, mixed up
in a sort of porridge of various political opinions and reflections;
but the Revolution in France is the grand ingredient in the
cauldron. I consider the address transmitted by the Revolution Society
to the National Assembly, through Earl Stanhope, as originating in the
principles of the sermon and as a corollary from them. It was moved by
the preacher of that discourse. It was passed by those who came
reeking from the effect of the sermon without any censure or
qualification, expressed or implied. If, however, any of the gentlemen
concerned shall wish to separate the sermon from the resolution,
they know how to acknowledge the one and to disavow the other. They
    For my part, I looked on that sermon as the public declaration
of a man much connected with literary caballers and intriguing
philosophers, with political theologians and theological politicians
both at home and abroad. I know they set him up as a sort of oracle,
because, with the best intentions in the world, he naturally
philippizes and chants his prophetic song in exact unison with their
    That sermon is in a strain which I believe has not been heard in
this kingdom, in any of the pulpits which are tolerated or
encouraged in it, since the year 1648, when a predecessor of Dr.
Price, the Rev. Hugh Peters, made the vault of the king's own chapel
at St. James's ring with the honor and privilege of the saints, who,
with the "high praises of God in their mouths, and a two-edged sword
in their hands, were to execute judgment on the heathen, and
punishments upon the people; to bind their kings with chains, and
their nobles with fetters of iron".* Few harangues from the pulpit,
except in the days of your league in France or in the days of our
Solemn League and Covenant in England, have ever breathed less of
the spirit of moderation than this lecture in the Old Jewry.
Supposing, however, that something like moderation were visible in
this political sermon, yet politics and the pulpit are terms that have
little agreement. No sound ought to be heard in the church but the
healing voice of Christian charity. The cause of civil liberty and
civil government gains as little as that of religion by this confusion
of duties. Those who quit their proper character to assume what does
not belong to them are, for the greater part, ignorant both of the
character they leave and of the character they assume. Wholly
unacquainted with the world in which they are so fond of meddling, and
inexperienced in all its affairs on which they pronounce with so
much confidence, they have nothing of politics but the passions they
excite. Surely the church is a place where one day's truce ought to be
allowed to the dissensions and animosities of mankind.
    This pulpit style, revived after so long a discontinuance, had
to me the air of novelty, and of a novelty not wholly without
danger. I do not charge this danger equally to every part of the
discourse. The hint given to a noble and reverend lay divine, who is
supposed high in office in one of our universities,* and other lay
divines "of rank and literature" may be proper and seasonable,
though somewhat new. If the noble Seekers should find nothing to
satisfy their pious fancies in the old staple of the national
church, or in all the rich variety to be found in the well-assorted
warehouses of the dissenting congregations, Dr. Price advises them
to improve upon non-conformity and to set up, each of them, a separate
meeting house upon his own particular principles.*(2) It is somewhat
remarkable that this reverend divine should be so earnest for
setting up new churches and so perfectly indifferent concerning the
doctrine which may be taught in them. His zeal is of a curious
character. It is not for the propagation of his own opinions, but of
any opinions. It is not for the diffusion of truth, but for the
spreading of contradiction. Let the noble teachers but dissent, it
is no matter from whom or from what. This great point once secured, it
is taken for granted their religion will be rational and manly. I
doubt whether religion would reap all the benefits which the
calculating divine computes from this "great company of great
preachers". It would certainly be a valuable addition of
nondescripts to the ample collection of known classes, genera and
species, which at present beautify the hortus siccus of dissent. A
sermon from a noble duke, or a noble marquis, or a noble earl, or
baron bold would certainly increase and diversify the amusements of
this town, which begins to grow satiated with the uniform round of its
vapid dissipations. I should only stipulate that these new
Mess-Johns in robes and coronets should keep some sort of bounds in
the democratic and leveling principles which are expected from their
titled pulpits. The new evangelists will, I dare say, disappoint the
hopes that are conceived of them. They will not become, literally as
well as figuratively, polemic divines, nor be disposed so to drill
their congregations that they may, as in former blessed times,
preach their doctrines to regiments of dragoons and corps of
infantry and artillery. Such arrangements, however favorable to the
cause of compulsory freedom, civil and religious, may not be equally
conducive to the national tranquility. These few restrictions I hope
are no great stretches of intolerance, no very violent exertions of
    * Discourse on the Love of our Country, Nov. 4, 1789, by Dr.
    *(2) "Those who dislike that mode of worship which is prescribed
by public authority, ought, if they can find no worship out of the
church which they approve, to set up a separate worship for
themselves; and by doing this, and giving an example of a rational and
manly worship, men of weight from their rank and literature may do the
greatest service to society and the world".- P 18, Dr. Price's Sermon.
    BUT I may say of our preacher "utinam nugis tota illa dedisset
tempora saevitiae".- All things in this his fulminating bull are not
of so innoxious a tendency. His doctrines affect our constitution in
its vital parts. He tells the Revolution Society in this political
sermon that his Majesty "is almost the only lawful king in the world
because the only one who owes his crown to the choice of his
people." As to the kings of the world, all of whom (except one) this
archpontiff of the rights of men, with all the plenitude and with more
than the boldness of the papal deposing power in its meridian fervor
of the twelfth century, puts into one sweeping clause of ban and
anathema and proclaims usurpers by circles of longitude and
latitude, over the whole globe, it behooves them to consider how
they admit into their territories these apostolic missionaries who are
to tell their subjects they are not lawful kings. That is their
concern. It is ours, as a domestic interest of some moment,
seriously to consider the solidity of the only principle upon which
these gentlemen acknowledge a king of Great Britain to be entitled
    This doctrine, as applied to the prince now on the British throne,
either is nonsense and therefore neither true nor false, or it affirms
a most unfounded, dangerous, illegal, and unconstitutional position.
According to this spiritual doctor of politics, if his Majesty does
not owe his crown to the choice of his people, he is no lawful king.
Now nothing can be more untrue than that the crown of this kingdom
is so held by his Majesty. Therefore, if you follow their rule, the
king of Great Britain, who most certainly does not owe his high office
to any form of popular election, is in no respect better than the rest
of the gang of usurpers who reign, or rather rob, all over the face of
this our miserable world without any sort of right or title to the
allegiance of their people. The policy of this general doctrine, so
qualified, is evident enough. The propagators of this political gospel
are in hopes that their abstract principle (their principle that a
popular choice is necessary to the legal existence of the sovereign
magistracy) would be overlooked, whilst the king of Great Britain
was not affected by it. In the meantime the ears of their
congregations would be gradually habituated to it, as if it were a
first principle admitted without dispute. For the present it would
only operate as a theory, pickled in the preserving juices of pulpit
eloquence, and laid by for future use. Condo et compono quae mox
depromere possim. By this policy, whilst our government is soothed
with a reservation in its favor, to which it has no claim, the
security which it has in common with all governments, so far as
    Thus these politicians proceed whilst little notice is taken of
their doctrines; but when they come to be examined upon the plain
meaning of their words and the direct tendency of their doctrines,
then equivocations and slippery constructions come into play. When
they say the king owes his crown to the choice of his people and is
therefore the only lawful sovereign in the world, they will perhaps
tell us they mean to say no more than that some of the king's
predecessors have been called to the throne by some sort of choice,
and therefore he owes his crown to the choice of his people. Thus,
by a miserable subterfuge, they hope to render their proposition
safe by rendering it nugatory. They are welcome to the asylum they
seek for their offense, since they take refuge in their folly. For
if you admit this interpretation, how does their idea of election
    And how does the settlement of the crown in the Brunswick line
derived from James the First come to legalize our monarchy rather than
that of any of the neighboring countries? At some time or other, to be
sure, all the beginners of dynasties were chosen by those who called
them to govern. There is ground enough for the opinion that all the
kingdoms of Europe were, at a remote period, elective, with more or
fewer limitations in the objects of choice. But whatever kings might
have been here or elsewhere a thousand years ago, or in whatever
manner the ruling dynasties of England or France may have begun, the
king of Great Britain is, at this day, king by a fixed rule of
succession according to the laws of his country; and whilst the
legal conditions of the compact of sovereignty are performed by him
(as they are performed), he holds his crown in contempt of the
choice of the Revolution Society, who have not a single vote for a
king amongst them, either individually or collectively, though I
make no doubt they would soon erect themselves into an electoral
college if things were ripe to give effect to their claim. His
Majesty's heirs and successors, each in his time and order, will
come to the crown with the same contempt of their choice with which
    Whatever may be the success of evasion in explaining away the
gross error of fact, which supposes that his Majesty (though he
holds it in concurrence with the wishes) owes his crown to the
choice of his people, yet nothing can evade their full explicit
declaration concerning the principle of a right in the people to
choose; which right is directly maintained and tenaciously adhered to.
All the oblique insinuations concerning election bottom in this
proposition and are referable to it. Lest the foundation of the king's
exclusive legal title should pass for a mere rant of adulatory
freedom, the political divine proceeds dogmatically to assert* that,
by the principles of the Revolution, the people of England have
acquired three fundamental rights, all which, with him, compose one
system and lie together in one short sentence, namely, that we have
This new and hitherto unheard-of bill of rights, though made in the
name of the whole people, belongs to those gentlemen and their faction
only. The body of the people of England have no share in it. They
utterly disclaim it. They will resist the practical assertion of it
with their lives and fortunes. They are bound to do so by the laws
of their country made at the time of that very Revolution which is
appealed to in favor of the fictitious rights claimed by the Society
    * Discourse on the Love of our Country, by Dr. Price, p. 34.
    THESE GENTLEMEN OF THE OLD JEWRY, in all their reasonings on the
Revolution of 1688, have a revolution which happened in England
about forty years before and the late French revolution, so much
before their eyes and in their hearts that they are constantly
confounding all the three together. It is necessary that we should
separate what they confound. We must recall their erring fancies to
the acts of the Revolution which we revere, for the discovery of its
true principles. If the principles of the Revolution of 1688 are
anywhere to be found, it is in the statute called the Declaration of
Right. In that most wise, sober, and considerate declaration, drawn up
by great lawyers and great statesmen, and not by warm and
inexperienced enthusiasts, not one word is said, nor one suggestion
made, of a general right "to choose our own governors, to cashier them
for misconduct, and to form a government for ourselves".
    This Declaration of Right (the act of the 1st of William and Mary,
sess. 2, ch. 2) is the cornerstone of our constitution as
reinforced, explained, improved, and in its fundamental principles for
ever settled. It is called, "An Act for declaring the rights and
liberties of the subject, and for settling the succession of the
crown". You will observe that these rights and this succession are
declared in one body and bound indissolubly together.
    A few years after this period, a second opportunity offered for
asserting a right of election to the crown. On the prospect of a total
failure of issue from King William, and from the Princess,
afterwards Queen Anne, the consideration of the settlement of the
crown and of a further security for the liberties of the people
again came before the legislature. Did they this second time make
any provision for legalizing the crown on the spurious revolution
principles of the Old Jewry? No. They followed the principles which
prevailed in the Declaration of Right, indicating with more
precision the persons who were to inherit in the Protestant line. This
act also incorporated, by the same policy, our liberties and an
hereditary succession in the same act. Instead of a right to choose
our own governors, they declared that the succession in that line (the
Protestant line drawn from James the First), was absolutely
necessary "for the peace, quiet, and security of the realm", and
that it was equally urgent on them "to maintain a certainty in the
succession thereof, to which the subjects may safely have recourse for
their protection". Both these acts, in which are heard the unerring,
unambiguous oracles of revolution policy, instead of countenancing the
delusive, gipsy predictions of a "right to choose our governors",
prove to a demonstration how totally adverse the wisdom of the
nation was from turning a case of necessity into a rule of law.
    Unquestionably, there was at the Revolution, in the person of King
William, a small and a temporary deviation from the strict order of
a regular hereditary succession; but it is against all genuine
principles of jurisprudence to draw a principle from a law made in a
special case and regarding an individual person. Privilegium non
transit in exemplum. If ever there was a time favorable for
establishing the principle that a king of popular choice was the
only legal king, without all doubt it was at the Revolution. Its not
being done at that time is a proof that the nation was of opinion it
ought not to be done at any time. There is no person so completely
ignorant of our history as not to know that the majority in parliament
of both parties were so little disposed to anything resembling that
principle that at first they were determined to place the vacant
crown, not on the head of the Prince of Orange, but on that of his
wife Mary, daughter of King James, the eldest born of the issue of
that king, which they acknowledged as undoubtedly his. It would be
to repeat a very trite story, to recall to your memory all those
circumstances which demonstrated that their accepting King William was
not properly a choice; but to all those who did not wish, in effect,
to recall King James or to deluge their country in blood and again
to bring their religion, laws, and liberties into the peril they had
just escaped, it was an act of necessity, in the strictest moral sense
    In the very act in which for a time, and in a single case,
parliament departed from the strict order of inheritance in favor of a
prince who, though not next, was, however, very near in the line of
succession, it is curious to observe how Lord Somers, who drew the
bill called the Declaration of Right, has comported himself on that
delicate occasion. It is curious to observe with what address this
temporary solution of continuity is kept from the eye, whilst all that
could be found in this act of necessity to countenance the idea of
an hereditary succession is brought forward, and fostered, and made
the most of, by this great man and by the legislature who followed
him. Quitting the dry, imperative style of an act of parliament, he
makes the Lords and Commons fall to a pious, legislative ejaculation
and declare that they consider it "as a marvellous providence and
merciful goodness of God to this nation to preserve their said
Majesties' royal persons most happily to reign over us on the throne
of their ancestors, for which, from the bottom of their hearts, they
return their humblest thanks and praises".- The legislature plainly
had in view the act of recognition of the first of Queen Elizabeth,
chap. 3rd, and of that of James the First, chap. 1st, both acts
strongly declaratory of the inheritable nature of the crown; and in
many parts they follow, with a nearly literal precision, the words and
even the form of thanksgiving which is found in these old
    The two Houses, in the act of King William, did not thank God that
they had found a fair opportunity to assert a right to choose their
own governors, much less to make an election the only lawful title
to the crown. Their having been in a condition to avoid the very
appearance of it, as much as possible, was by them considered as a
providential escape. They threw a politic, well-wrought veil over
every circumstance tending to weaken the rights which in the
meliorated order of succession they meant to perpetuate, or which
might furnish a precedent for any future departure from what they
had then settled forever. Accordingly, that they might not relax the
nerves of their monarchy, and that they might preserve a close
conformity to the practice of their ancestors, as it appeared in the
declaratory statutes of Queen Mary* and Queen Elizabeth, in the next
clause they vest, by recognition, in their Majesties all the legal
prerogatives of the crown, declaring "that in them they are most
fully, rightfully, and entirely invested, incorporated, united, and
annexed". In the clause which follows, for preventing questions by
reason of any pretended titles to the crown, they declare (observing
also in this the traditionary language, along with the traditionary
policy of the nation, and repeating as from a rubric the language of
the preceding acts of Elizabeth and James,) that on the preserving
"a certainty in the SUCCESSION thereof, the unity, peace, and
tranquillity of this nation doth, under God, wholly depend".
    They knew that a doubtful title of succession would but too much
resemble an election, and that an election would be utterly
destructive of the "unity, peace, and tranquillity of this nation",
which they thought to be considerations of some moment. To provide for
these objects and, therefore, to exclude for ever the Old Jewry
doctrine of "a right to choose our own governors", they follow with
a clause containing a most solemn pledge, taken from the preceding act
of Queen Elizabeth, as solemn a pledge as ever was or can be given
in favor of an hereditary succession, and as solemn a renunciation
as could be made of the principles by this Society imputed to them:
The Lords spiritual and temporal, and Commons, do, in the name of
all the people aforesaid, most humbly and faithfully submit
themselves, their heirs and posterities for ever; and do faithfully
promise that they will stand to maintain, and defend their said
Majesties, and also the limitation of the crown, herein specified
and contained, to the utmost of their powers, etc. etc.
    So far is it from being true that we acquired a right by the
Revolution to elect our kings that, if we had possessed it before, the
English nation did at that time most solemnly renounce and abdicate
it, for themselves and for all their posterity forever. These
gentlemen may value themselves as much as they please on their whig
principles, but I never desire to be thought a better whig than Lord
Somers, or to understand the principles of the Revolution better
than those, by whom it was brought about, or to read in the
Declaration of Right any mysteries unknown to those whose
penetrating style has engraved in our ordinances, and in our hearts,
    It is true that, aided with the powers derived from force and
opportunity, the nation was at that time, in some sense, free to
take what course it pleased for filling the throne, but only free to
do so upon the same grounds on which they might have wholly
abolished their monarchy and every other part of their constitution.
However, they did not think such bold changes within their commission.
It is indeed difficult, perhaps impossible, to give limits to the mere
abstract competence of the supreme power, such as was exercised by
parliament at that time, but the limits of a moral competence
subjecting, even in powers more indisputably sovereign, occasional
will to permanent reason and to the steady maxims of faith, justice,
and fixed fundamental policy, are perfectly intelligible and perfectly
binding upon those who exercise any authority, under any name or under
any title, in the state. The House of Lords, for instance, is not
morally competent to dissolve the House of Commons, no, nor even to
dissolve itself, nor to abdicate, if it would, its portion in the
legislature of the kingdom. Though a king may abdicate for his own
person, he cannot abdicate for the monarchy. By as strong, or by a
stronger reason, the House of Commons cannot renounce its share of
authority. The engagement and pact of society, which generally goes by
the name of the constitution, forbids such invasion and such
surrender. The constituent parts of a state are obliged to hold
their public faith with each other and with all those who derive any
serious interest under their engagements, as much as the whole state
is bound to keep its faith with separate communities. Otherwise
competence and power would soon be confounded and no law be left but
the will of a prevailing force. On this principle the succession of
the crown has always been what it now is, an hereditary succession
by law; in the old line it was a succession by the common law; in
the new, by the statute law operating on the principles of the
common law, not changing the substance, but regulating the mode and
describing the persons. Both these descriptions of law are of the same
force and are derived from an equal authority emanating from the
common agreement and original compact of the state, communi
sponsione reipublicae, and as such are equally binding on king and
people, too, as long as the terms are observed and they continue the
    It is far from impossible to reconcile, if we do not suffer
ourselves to be entangled in the mazes of metaphysic sophistry, the
use both of a fixed rule and an occasional deviation: the sacredness
of an hereditary principle of succession in our government with a
power of change in its application in cases of extreme emergency. Even
in that extremity (if we take the measure of our rights by our
exercise of them at the Revolution), the change is to be confined to
the peccant part only, to the part which produced the necessary
deviation; and even then it is to be effected without a
decomposition of the whole civil and political mass for the purpose of
originating a new civil order out of the first elements of society.
    A state without the means of some change is without the means of
its conservation. Without such means it might even risk the loss of
that part of the constitution which it wished the most religiously
to preserve. The two principles of conservation and correction
operated strongly at the two critical periods of the Restoration and
Revolution, when England found itself without a king. At both those
periods the nation had lost the bond of union in their ancient
edifice; they did not, however, dissolve the whole fabric. On the
contrary, in both cases they regenerated the deficient part of the old
constitution through the parts which were not impaired. They kept
these old parts exactly as they were, that the part recovered might be
suited to them. They acted by the ancient organized states in the
shape of their old organization, and not by the organic moleculae of a
disbanded people. At no time, perhaps, did the sovereign legislature
manifest a more tender regard to that fundamental principle of British
constitutional policy than at the time of the Revolution, when it
deviated from the direct line of hereditary succession. The crown
was carried somewhat out of the line in which it had before moved, but
the new line was derived from the same stock. It was still a line of
hereditary descent, still an hereditary descent in the same blood,
though an hereditary descent qualified with Protestantism. When the
legislature altered the direction, but kept the principle, they showed
    On this principle, the law of inheritance had admitted some
amendment in the old time, and long before the era of the
Revolution. Some time after the Conquest, great questions arose upon
the legal principles of hereditary descent. It became a matter of
doubt whether the heir per capita or the heir per stirpes was to
succeed; but whether the heir per capita gave way when the heirdom per
stirpes took place, or the Catholic heir when the Protestant was
preferred, the inheritable principle survived with a sort of
immortality through all transmigrations- multosque per annos stat
fortuna domus, et avi numerantur avorum. This is the spirit of our
constitution, not only in its settled course, but in all its
revolutions. Whoever came in, or however he came in, whether he
obtained the crown by law or by force, the hereditary succession was
    The gentlemen of the Society for Revolution see nothing in that of
1688 but the deviation from the constitution; and they take the
deviation from the principle for the principle. They have little
regard to the obvious consequences of their doctrine, though they must
see that it leaves positive authority in very few of the positive
institutions of this country. When such an unwarrantable maxim is once
established, that no throne is lawful but the elective, no one act
of the princes who preceded this era of fictitious election can be
valid. Do these theorists mean to imitate some of their predecessors
who dragged the bodies of our ancient sovereigns out of the quiet of
their tombs? Do they mean to attaint and disable backward all the
kings that have reigned before the Revolution, and consequently to
stain the throne of England with the blot of a continual usurpation?
Do they mean to invalidate, annul, or to call into question,
together with the titles of the whole line of our kings, that great
body of our statute law which passed under those whom they treat as
usurpers, to annul laws of inestimable value to our liberties- of as
great value at least as any which have passed at or since the period
of the Revolution? If kings who did not owe their crown to the
choice of their people had no title to make laws, what will become
of the statute de tallagio non concedendo?- of the petition of right?-
of the act of habeas corpus? Do these new doctors of the rights of men
presume to assert that King James the Second, who came to the crown as
next of blood, according to the rules of a then unqualified
succession, was not to all intents and purposes a lawful king of
England before he had done any of those acts which were justly
construed into an abdication of his crown? If he was not, much trouble
in parliament might have been saved at the period these gentlemen
commemorate. But King James was a bad king with a good title, and
not an usurper. The princes who succeeded, according to the act of
parliament which settled the crown on the Electress Sophia and on
her descendants, being Protestants, came in as much by a title of
inheritance as King James did. He came in according to the law as it
stood at his accession to the crown; and the princes of the House of
Brunswick came to the inheritance of the crown, not by election, but
by the law as it stood at their several accessions of Protestant
descent and inheritance, as I hope I have shown sufficiently.
    The law by which this royal family is specifically destined to the
succession is the act of the 12th and 13th of King William. The
terms of this act bind "us and our heirs, and our posterity, to
them, their heirs, and their posterity", being Protestants, to the end
of time, in the same words as the Declaration of Right had bound us to
the heirs of King William and Queen Mary. It therefore secures both an
hereditary crown and an hereditary allegiance. On what ground,
except the constitutional policy of forming an establishment to secure
that kind of succession which is to preclude a choice of the people
forever, could the legislature have fastidiously rejected the fair and
abundant choice which our country presented to them and searched in
strange lands for a foreign princess from whose womb the line of our
future rulers were to derive their title to govern millions of men
    The Princess Sophia was named in the act of settlement of the 12th
and 13th of King William for a stock and root of inheritance to our
kings, and not for her merits as a temporary administratrix of a power
which she might not, and in fact did not, herself ever exercise. She
was adopted for one reason, and for one only, because, says the act,
"the most excellent Princess Sophia, Electress and Duchess Dowager
of Hanover, is daughter of the most excellent Princess Elizabeth, late
Queen of Bohemia, daughter of our late sovereign lord King James the
First, of happy memory, and is hereby declared to be the next in
succession in the Protestant line etc., etc., and the crown shall
continue to the heirs of her body, being Protestants." This limitation
was made by parliament, that through the Princess Sophia an
inheritable line not only was to be continued in future, but (what
they thought very material) that through her it was to be connected
with the old stock of inheritance in King James the First, in order
that the monarchy might preserve an unbroken unity through all ages
and might be preserved (with safety to our religion) in the old
approved mode by descent, in which, if our liberties had been once
endangered, they had often, through all storms and struggles of
prerogative and privilege, been preserved. They did well. No
experience has taught us that in any other course or method than
that of an hereditary crown our liberties can be regularly perpetuated
and preserved sacred as our hereditary right. An irregular, convulsive
movement may be necessary to throw off an irregular, convulsive
disease. But the course of succession is the healthy habit of the
British constitution. Was it that the legislature wanted, at the act
for the limitation of the crown in the Hanoverian line, drawn
through the female descendants of James the First, a due sense of
the inconveniences of having two or three, or possibly more,
foreigners in succession to the British throne? No!- they had a due
sense of the evils which might happen from such foreign rule, and more
than a due sense of them. But a more decisive proof cannot be given of
the full conviction of the British nation that the principles of the
Revolution did not authorize them to elect kings at their pleasure,
and without any attention to the ancient fundamental principles of our
government, than their continuing to adopt a plan of hereditary
Protestant succession in the old line, with all the dangers and all
the inconveniences of its being a foreign line full before their
eyes and operating with the utmost force upon their minds.
    A few years ago I should be ashamed to overload a matter so
capable of supporting itself by the then unnecessary support of any
argument; but this seditious, unconstitutional doctrine is now
publicly taught, avowed, and printed. The dislike I feel to
revolutions, the signals for which have so often been given from
pulpits; the spirit of change that is gone abroad; the total
contempt which prevails with you, and may come to prevail with us,
of all ancient institutions when set in opposition to a present
sense of convenience or to the bent of a present inclination: all
these considerations make it not unadvisable, in my opinion, to call
back our attention to the true principles of our own domestic laws;
that you, my French friend, should begin to know, and that we should
continue to cherish them. We ought not, on either side of the water,
to suffer ourselves to be imposed upon by the counterfeit wares
which some persons, by a double fraud, export to you in illicit
bottoms as raw commodities of British growth, though wholly alien to
our soil, in order afterwards to smuggle them back again into this
country, manufactured after the newest Paris fashion of an improved
    The people of England will not ape the fashions they have never
tried, nor go back to those which they have found mischievous on
trial. They look upon the legal hereditary succession of their crown
as among their rights, not as among their wrongs; as a benefit, not as
a grievance; as a security for their liberty, not as a badge of
servitude. They look on the frame of their commonwealth, such as it
stands, to be of inestimable value, and they conceive the
undisturbed succession of the crown to be a pledge of the stability
and perpetuity of all the other members of our constitution.
    I shall beg leave, before I go any further, to take notice of some
paltry artifices which the abettors of election, as the only lawful
title to the crown, are ready to employ in order to render the support
of the just principles of our constitution a task somewhat
invidious. These sophisters substitute a fictitious cause and
feigned personages, in whose favor they suppose you engaged whenever
you defend the inheritable nature of the crown. It is common with them
to dispute as if they were in a conflict with some of those exploded
fanatics of slavery, who formerly maintained what I believe no
creature now maintains, "that the crown is held by divine hereditary
and indefeasible right".- These old fanatics of single arbitrary power
dogmatized as if hereditary royalty was the only lawful government
in the world, just as our new fanatics of popular arbitrary power
maintain that a popular election is the sole lawful source of
authority. The old prerogative enthusiasts, it is true, did
speculate foolishly, and perhaps impiously too, as if monarchy had
more of a divine sanction than any other mode of government; and as if
a right to govern by inheritance were in strictness indefeasible in
every person who should be found in the succession to a throne, and
under every circumstance, which no civil or political right can be.
But an absurd opinion concerning the king's hereditary right to the
crown does not prejudice one that is rational and bottomed upon
solid principles of law and policy. If all the absurd theories of
lawyers and divines were to vitiate the objects in which they are
conversant, we should have no law and no religion left in the world.
But an absurd theory on one side of a question forms no
justification for alleging a false fact or promulgating mischievous
    THE second claim of the Revolution Society is "a right of
cashiering their governors for misconduct". Perhaps the
apprehensions our ancestors entertained of forming such a precedent as
that "of cashiering for misconduct" was the cause that the declaration
of the act, which implied the abdication of King James, was, if it had
any fault, rather too guarded and too circumstantial.* But all this
guard and all this accumulation of circumstances serves to show the
spirit of caution which predominated in the national councils in a
situation in which men irritated by oppression, and elevated by a
triumph over it, are apt to abandon themselves to violent and
extreme courses; it shows the anxiety of the great men who
influenced the conduct of affairs at that great event to make the
Revolution a parent of settlement, and not a nursery of future
    * "That King James the Second, having endeavored to subvert the
constitution of the kingdom by breaking the original contract
between king and people, and, by the advice of Jesuits and other
wicked persons, having violated the fundamental laws, and having
withdrawn himself out of the kingdom, hath abdicated the Government,
    No government could stand a moment if it could be blown down
with anything so loose and indefinite as an opinion of "misconduct".
They who led at the Revolution grounded the virtual abdication of King
James upon no such light and uncertain principle. They charged him
with nothing less than a design, confirmed by a multitude of illegal
overt acts, to subvert the Protestant church and state, and their
fundamental, unquestionable laws and liberties; they charged him
with having broken the original contract between king and people. This
was more than misconduct. A grave and overruling necessity obliged
them to take the step they took, and took with infinite reluctance, as
under that most rigorous of all laws. Their trust for the future
preservation of the constitution was not in future revolutions. The
grand policy of all their regulations was to render it almost
impracticable for any future sovereign to compel the states of the
kingdom to have again recourse to those violent remedies. They left
the crown what, in the eye and estimation of law, it had ever
been-perfectly irresponsible. In order to lighten the crown still
further, they aggravated responsibility on ministers of state. By
the statute of the 1st of King William, sess. 2nd, called "the act for
declaring the rights and liberties of the subject, and for settling
the succession of the crown", they enacted that the ministers should
serve the crown on the terms of that declaration. They secured soon
after the frequent meetings of parliament, by which the whole
government would be under the constant inspection and active control
of the popular representative and of the magnates of the kingdom. In
the next great constitutional act, that of the 12th and 13th of King
William, for the further limitation of the crown and better securing
the rights and liberties of the subject, they provided "that no pardon
under the great seal of England should be pleadable to an
impeachment by the Commons in parliament". The rule laid down for
government in the Declaration of Right, the constant inspection of
parliament, the practical claim of impeachment, they thought
infinitely a better security, not only for their constitutional
liberty, but against the vices of administration, than the reservation
of a right so difficult in the practice, so uncertain in the issue,
and often so mischievous in the consequences, as that of "cashiering
    Dr. Price, in this sermon,* condemns very properly the practice of
gross, adulatory addresses to kings. Instead of this fulsome style, he
proposes that his Majesty should be told, on occasions of
congratulation, that "he is to consider himself as more properly the
servant than the sovereign of his people". For a compliment, this
new form of address does not seem to be very soothing. Those who are
servants in name, as well as in effect, do not like to be told of
their situation, their duty, and their obligations. The slave, in
the old play, tells his master, "Haec commemoratio est quasi
exprobatio". It is not pleasant as compliment; it is not wholesome
as instruction. After all, if the king were to bring himself to echo
this new kind of address, to adopt it in terms, and even to take the
appellation of Servant of the People as his royal style, how either he
or we should be much mended by it I cannot imagine. I have seen very
assuming letters, signed "Your most obedient, humble servant". The
proudest denomination that ever was endured on earth took a title of
still greater humility than that which is now proposed for
sovereigns by the Apostle of Liberty. Kings and nations were
trampled upon by the foot of one calling himself "the Servant of
Servants"; and mandates for deposing sovereigns were sealed with the
    I should have considered all this as no more than a sort of
flippant, vain discourse, in which, as in an unsavory fume, several
persons suffer the spirit of liberty to evaporate, if it were not
plainly in support of the idea and a part of the scheme of "cashiering
kings for misconduct". In that light it is worth some observation.
    Kings, in one sense, are undoubtedly the servants of the people
because their power has no other rational end than that of the general
advantage; but it is not true that they are, in the ordinary sense (by
our constitution, at least), anything like servants; the essence of
whose situation is to obey the commands of some other and to be
removable at pleasure. But the king of Great Britain obeys no other
person; all other persons are individually, and collectively too,
under him and owe to him a legal obedience. The law, which knows
neither to flatter nor to insult, calls this high magistrate not our
servant, as this humble divine calls him, but "our sovereign Lord
the king"; and we, on our parts, have learned to speak only the
primitive language of the law, and not the confused jargon of their
    As he is not to obey us, but as we are to obey the law in him, our
constitution has made no sort of provision toward rendering him, as
a servant, in any degree responsible. Our constitution knows nothing
of a magistrate like the Justicia of Aragon, nor of any court
legally appointed, nor of any process legally settled, for
submitting the king to the responsibility belonging to all servants.
In this he is not distinguished from the Commons and the Lords, who,
in their several public capacities, can never be called to an
account for their conduct, although the Revolution Society chooses
to assert, in direct opposition to one of the wisest and most
beautiful parts of our constitution, that "a king is no more than
the first servant of the public, created by it, and responsible to it"
    Ill would our ancestors at the Revolution have deserved their fame
for wisdom if they had found no security for their freedom but in
rendering their government feeble in its operations, and precarious in
its tenure; if they had been able to contrive no better remedy against
arbitrary power than civil confusion. Let these gentlemen state who
that representative public is to whom they will affirm the king, as
a servant, to be responsible. It will then be time enough for me to
produce to them the positive statute law which affirms that he is not.
    The ceremony of cashiering kings, of which these gentlemen talk so
much at their ease, can rarely, if ever, be performed without force.
It then becomes a case of war, and not of constitution. Laws are
commanded to hold their tongues amongst arms, and tribunals fall to
the ground with the peace they are no longer able to uphold. The
Revolution of 1688 was obtained by a just war, in the only case in
which any war, and much more a civil war, can be just. Justa bella
quibus necessaria. The question of dethroning or, if these gentlemen
like the phrase better, "cashiering kings" will always be, as it has
always been, an extraordinary question of state, and wholly out of the
law- a question (like all other questions of state) of dispositions
and of means and of probable consequences rather than of positive
rights. As it was not made for common abuses, so it is not to be
agitated by common minds. The speculative line of demarcation where
obedience ought to end and resistance must begin is faint, obscure,
and not easily definable. It is not a single act, or a single event,
which determines it. Governments must be abused and deranged,
indeed, before it can be thought of; and the prospect of the future
must be as bad as the experience of the past. When things are in
that lamentable condition, the nature of the disease is to indicate
the remedy to those whom nature has qualified to administer in
extremities this critical, ambiguous, bitter potion to a distempered
state. Times and occasions and provocations will teach their own
lessons. The wise will determine from the gravity of the case; the
irritable, from sensibility to oppression; the high-minded, from
disdain and indignation at abusive power in unworthy hands; the
brave and bold, from the love of honorable danger in a generous cause;
but, with or without right, a revolution will be the very last
    THE third head of right, asserted by the pulpit of the Old
Jewry, namely, the "right to form a government for ourselves", has, at
least, as little countenance from anything done at the Revolution,
either in precedent or principle, as the two first of their claims.
The Revolution was made to preserve our ancient, indisputable laws and
liberties and that ancient constitution of government which is our
only security for law and liberty. If you are desirous of knowing
the spirit of our constitution and the policy which predominated in
that great period which has secured it to this hour, pray look for
both in our histories, in our records, in our acts of parliament,
and journals of parliament, and not in the sermons of the Old Jewry
and the after-dinner toasts of the Revolution Society. In the former
you will find other ideas and another language. Such a claim is as
ill-suited to our temper and wishes as it is unsupported by any
appearance of authority. The very idea of the fabrication of a new
government is enough to fill us with disgust and horror. We wished
at the period of the Revolution, and do now wish, to derive all we
possess as an inheritance from our forefathers. Upon that body and
stock of inheritance we have taken care not to inoculate any cyon
alien to the nature of the original plant. All the reformations we
have hitherto made have proceeded upon the principle of reverence to
antiquity; and I hope, nay, I am persuaded, that all those which
possibly may be made hereafter will be carefully formed upon
    Our oldest reformation is that of Magna Charta. You will see
that Sir Edward Coke, that great oracle of our law, and indeed all the
great men who follow him, to Blackstone,* are industrious to prove the
pedigree of our liberties. They endeavor to prove that the ancient
charter, the Magna Charta of King John, was connected with another
positive charter from Henry I, and that both the one and the other
were nothing more than a reaffirmance of the still more ancient
standing law of the kingdom. In the matter of fact, for the greater
part these authors appear to be in the right; perhaps not always;
but if the lawyers mistake in some particulars, it proves my
position still the more strongly, because it demonstrates the powerful
prepossession toward antiquity, with which the minds of all our
lawyers and legislators, and of all the people whom they wish to
influence, have been always filled, and the stationary policy of
this kingdom in considering their most sacred rights and franchises as
    * See Blackstone's Magna Charta, printed at Oxford, 1759.
    In the famous law of the 3rd of Charles I, called the Petition
of Right, the parliament says to the king, "Your subjects have
inherited this freedom", claiming their franchises not on abstract
principles "as the rights of men", but as the rights of Englishmen,
and as a patrimony derived from their forefathers. Selden and the
other profoundly learned men who drew this Petition of Right were as
well acquainted, at least, with all the general theories concerning
the "rights of men" as any of the discoursers in our pulpits or on
your tribune; full as well as Dr. Price or as the Abbe Sieyes. But,
for reasons worthy of that practical wisdom which superseded their
theoretic science, they preferred this positive, recorded,
hereditary title to all which can be dear to the man and the
citizen, to that vague speculative right which exposed their sure
inheritance to be scrambled for and torn to pieces by every wild,
    The same policy pervades all the laws which have since been made
for the preservation of our liberties. In the 1st of William and Mary,
in the famous statute called the Declaration of Right, the two
Houses utter not a syllable of "a right to frame a government for
themselves". You will see that their whole care was to secure the
religion, laws, and liberties that had been long possessed, and had
been lately endangered. "Taking* into their most serious consideration
the best means for making such an establishment, that their
religion, laws, and liberties might not be in danger of being again
subverted", they auspicate all their proceedings by stating as some of
those best means, "in the first place" to do "as their ancestors in
like cases have usually done for vindicating their ancient rights
and liberties, to declare"- and then they pray the king and queen
"that it may be declared and enacted that all and singular the
rights and liberties asserted and declared are the true ancient and
indubitable rights and liberties of the people of this kingdom".
    You will observe that from Magna Charta to the Declaration of
Right it has been the uniform policy of our constitution to claim
and assert our liberties as an entailed inheritance derived to us from
our forefathers, and to be transmitted to our posterity- as an
estate specially belonging to the people of this kingdom, without
any reference whatever to any other more general or prior right. By
this means our constitution preserves a unity in so great a
diversity of its parts. We have an inheritable crown, an inheritable
peerage, and a House of Commons and a people inheriting privileges,
franchises, and liberties from a long line of ancestors.
    This policy appears to me to be the result of profound reflection,
or rather the happy effect of following nature, which is wisdom
without reflection, and above it. A spirit of innovation is
generally the result of a selfish temper and confined views. People
will not look forward to posterity, who never look backward to their
ancestors. Besides, the people of England well know that the idea of
inheritance furnishes a sure principle of conservation and a sure
principle of transmission, without at all excluding a principle of
improvement. It leaves acquisition free, but it secures what it
acquires. Whatever advantages are obtained by a state proceeding on
these maxims are locked fast as in a sort of family settlement,
grasped as in a kind of mortmain forever. By a constitutional
policy, working after the pattern of nature, we receive, we hold, we
transmit our government and our privileges in the same manner in which
we enjoy and transmit our property and our lives. The institutions
of policy, the goods of fortune, the gifts of providence are handed
down to us, and from us, in the same course and order. Our political
system is placed in a just correspondence and symmetry with the
order of the world and with the mode of existence decreed to a
permanent body composed of transitory parts, wherein, by the
disposition of a stupendous wisdom, molding together the great
mysterious incorporation of the human race, the whole, at one time, is
never old or middle-aged or young, but, in a condition of unchangeable
constancy, moves on through the varied tenor of perpetual decay, fall,
renovation, and progression. Thus, by preserving the method of
nature in the conduct of the state, in what we improve we are never
wholly new; in what we retain we are never wholly obsolete. By
adhering in this manner and on those principles to our forefathers, we
are guided not by the superstition of antiquarians, but by the
spirit of philosophic analogy. In this choice of inheritance we have
given to our frame of polity the image of a relation in blood, binding
up the constitution of our country with our dearest domestic ties,
adopting our fundamental laws into the bosom of our family affections,
keeping inseparable and cherishing with the warmth of all their
combined and mutually reflected charities our state, our hearths,
    Through the same plan of a conformity to nature in our
artificial institutions, and by calling in the aid of her unerring and
powerful instincts to fortify the fallible and feeble contrivances
of our reason, we have derived several other, and those no small,
benefits from considering our liberties in the light of an
inheritance. Always acting as if in the presence of canonized
forefathers, the spirit of freedom, leading in itself to misrule and
excess, is tempered with an awful gravity. This idea of a liberal
descent inspires us with a sense of habitual native dignity which
prevents that upstart insolence almost inevitably adhering to and
disgracing those who are the first acquirers of any distinction. By
this means our liberty becomes a noble freedom. It carries an imposing
and majestic aspect. It has a pedigree and illustrating ancestors.
It has its bearings and its ensigns armorial. It has its gallery of
portraits, its monumental inscriptions, its records, evidences, and
titles. We procure reverence to our civil institutions on the
principle upon which nature teaches us to revere individual men: on
account of their age and on account of those from whom they are
descended. All your sophisters cannot produce anything better
adapted to preserve a rational and manly freedom than the course
that we have pursued, who have chosen our nature rather than our
speculations, our breasts rather than our inventions, for the great
conservatories and magazines of our rights and privileges.
    YOU MIGHT, IF YOU PLEASED, have profited of our example and have
given to your recovered freedom a correspondent dignity. Your
privileges, though discontinued, were not lost to memory. Your
constitution, it is true, whilst you were out of possession,
suffered waste and dilapidation; but you possessed in some parts the
walls and in all the foundations of a noble and venerable castle.
You might have repaired those walls; you might have built on those old
foundations. Your constitution was suspended before it was
perfected, but you had the elements of a constitution very nearly as
good as could be wished. In your old states you possessed that variety
of parts corresponding with the various descriptions of which your
community was happily composed; you had all that combination and all
that opposition of interests; you had that action and counteraction
which, in the natural and in the political world, from the
reciprocal struggle of discordant powers, draws out the harmony of the
universe. These opposed and conflicting interests which you considered
as so great a blemish in your old and in our present constitution
interpose a salutary check to all precipitate resolutions. They render
deliberation a matter, not of choice, but of necessity; they make
all change a subject of compromise, which naturally begets moderation;
they produce temperaments preventing the sore evil of harsh, crude,
unqualified reformations, and rendering all the headlong exertions
of arbitrary power, in the few or in the many, for ever impracticable.
Through that diversity of members and interests, general liberty had
as many securities as there were separate views in the several orders,
whilst, by pressing down the whole by the weight of a real monarchy,
the separate parts would have been prevented from warping and starting
    You had all these advantages in your ancient states, but you chose
to act as if you had never been molded into civil society and had
everything to begin anew. You began ill, because you began by
despising everything that belonged to you. You set up your trade
without a capital. If the last generations of your country appeared
without much luster in your eyes, you might have passed them by and
derived your claims from a more early race of ancestors. Under a pious
predilection for those ancestors, your imaginations would have
realized in them a standard of virtue and wisdom beyond the vulgar
practice of the hour; and you would have risen with the example to
whose imitation you aspired. Respecting your forefathers, you would
have been taught to respect yourselves. You would not have chosen to
consider the French as a people of yesterday, as a nation of lowborn
servile wretches until the emancipating year of 1789. In order to
furnish, at the expense of your honor, an excuse to your apologists
here for several enormities of yours, you would not have been
content to be represented as a gang of Maroon slaves suddenly broke
loose from the house of bondage, and therefore to be pardoned for your
abuse of the liberty to which you were not accustomed and ill
fitted. Would it not, my worthy friend, have been wiser to have you
thought, what I, for one, always thought you, a generous and gallant
nation, long misled to your disadvantage by your high and romantic
sentiments of fidelity, honor, and loyalty; that events had been
unfavorable to you, but that you were not enslaved through any
illiberal or servile disposition; that in your most devoted submission
you were actuated by a principle of public spirit, and that it was
your country you worshiped in the person of your king? Had you made it
to be understood that in the delusion of this amiable error you had
gone further than your wise ancestors, that you were resolved to
resume your ancient privileges, whilst you preserved the spirit of
your ancient and your recent loyalty and honor; or if, diffident of
yourselves and not clearly discerning the almost obliterated
constitution of your ancestors, you had looked to your neighbors in
this land who had kept alive the ancient principles and models of
the old common law of Europe meliorated and adapted to its present
state- by following wise examples you would have given new examples of
wisdom to the world. You would have rendered the cause of liberty
venerable in the eyes of every worthy mind in every nation. You
would have shamed despotism from the earth by showing that freedom was
not only reconcilable, but, as when well disciplined it is,
auxiliary to law. You would have had an unoppressive but a
productive revenue. You would have had a flourishing commerce to
feed it. You would have had a free constitution, a potent monarchy,
a disciplined army, a reformed and venerated clergy, a mitigated but
spirited nobility to lead your virtue, not to overlay it; you would
have had a liberal order of commons to emulate and to recruit that
nobility; you would have had a protected, satisfied, laborious, and
obedient people, taught to seek and to recognize the happiness that is
to be found by virtue in all conditions; in which consists the true
moral equality of mankind, and not in that monstrous fiction which, by
inspiring false ideas and vain expectations into men destined to
travel in the obscure walk of laborious life, serves only to aggravate
and embitter that real inequality which it never can remove, and which
the order of civil life establishes as much for the benefit of those
whom it must leave in a humble state as those whom it is able to exalt
to a condition more splendid, but not more happy. You had a smooth and
easy career of felicity and glory laid open to you, beyond anything
recorded in the history of the world, but you have shown that
    COMPUTE your gains: see what is got by those extravagant and
presumptuous speculations which have taught your leaders to despise
all their predecessors, and all their contemporaries, and even to
despise themselves until the moment in which they become truly
despicable. By following those false lights, France has bought
undisguised calamities at a higher price than any nation has purchased
the most unequivocal blessings! France has bought poverty by crime!
France has not sacrificed her virtue to her interest, but she has
abandoned her interest, that she might prostitute her virtue. All
other nations have begun the fabric of a new government, or the
reformation of an old, by establishing originally or by enforcing with
greater exactness some rites or other of religion. All other people
have laid the foundations of civil freedom in severer manners and a
system of a more austere and masculine morality. France, when she
let loose the reins of regal authority, doubled the license of a
ferocious dissoluteness in manners and of an insolent irreligion in
opinions and practice, and has extended through all ranks of life,
as if she were communicating some privilege or laying open some
secluded benefit, all the unhappy corruptions that usually were the
disease of wealth and power. This is one of the new principles of
    France, by the perfidy of her leaders, has utterly disgraced the
tone of lenient council in the cabinets of princes, and disarmed it of
its most potent topics. She has sanctified the dark, suspicious maxims
of tyrannous distrust, and taught kings to tremble at (what will
hereafter be called) the delusive plausibilities of moral politicians.
Sovereigns will consider those who advise them to place an unlimited
confidence in their people as subverters of their thrones, as traitors
who aim at their destruction by leading their easy good-nature,
under specious pretenses, to admit combinations of bold and
faithless men into a participation of their power. This alone (if
there were nothing else) is an irreparable calamity to you and to
mankind. Remember that your parliament of Paris told your king that,
in calling the states together, he had nothing to fear but the
prodigal excess of their zeal in providing for the support of the
throne. It is right that these men should hide their heads. It is
right that they should bear their part in the ruin which their counsel
has brought on their sovereign and their country. Such sanguine
declarations tend to lull authority asleep; to encourage it rashly
to engage in perilous adventures of untried policy; to neglect those
provisions, preparations, and precautions which distinguish
benevolence from imbecility, and without which no man can answer for
the salutary effect of any abstract plan of government or of
freedom. For want of these, they have seen the medicine of the state
corrupted into its poison. They have seen the French rebel against a
mild and lawful monarch with more fury, outrage, and insult than
ever any people has been known to rise against the most illegal
usurper or the most sanguinary tyrant. Their resistance was made to
concession, their revolt was from protection, their blow was aimed
at a hand holding out graces, favors, and immunities.
    This was unnatural. The rest is in order. They have found their
punishment in their success: laws overturned; tribunals subverted;
industry without vigor; commerce expiring; the revenue unpaid, yet the
people impoverished; a church pillaged, and a state not relieved;
civil and military anarchy made the constitution of the kingdom;
everything human and divine sacrificed to the idol of public credit,
and national bankruptcy the consequence; and, to crown all, the
paper securities of new, precarious, tottering power, the
discredited paper securities of impoverished fraud and beggared
rapine, held out as a currency for the support of an empire in lieu of
the two great recognized species that represent the lasting,
conventional credit of mankind, which disappeared and hid themselves
in the earth from whence they came, when the principle of property,
whose creatures and representatives they are, was systematically
    Were all these dreadful things necessary? Were they the inevitable
results of the desperate struggle of determined patriots, compelled to
wade through blood and tumult to the quiet shore of a tranquil and
prosperous liberty? No! nothing like it. The fresh ruins of France,
which shock our feelings wherever we can turn our eyes, are not the
devastation of civil war; they are the sad but instructive monuments
of rash and ignorant counsel in time of profound peace. They are the
display of inconsiderate and presumptuous, because unresisted and
irresistible, authority. The persons who have thus squandered away the
precious treasure of their crimes, the persons who have made this
prodigal and wild waste of public evils (the last stake reserved for
the ultimate ransom of the state) have met in their progress with
little or rather with no opposition at all. Their whole march was more
like a triumphal procession than the progress of a war. Their pioneers
have gone before them and demolished and laid everything level at
their feet. Not one drop of their blood have they shed in the cause of
the country they have ruined. They have made no sacrifices to their
projects of greater consequence than their shoebuckles, whilst they
were imprisoning their king, murdering their fellow citizens, and
bathing in tears and plunging in poverty and distress thousands of
worthy men and worthy families. Their cruelty has not even been the
base result of fear. It has been the effect of their sense of
perfect safety, in authorizing treasons, robberies, rapes,
assassinations, slaughters, and burnings throughout their harassed
land. But the cause of all was plain from the beginning.
    THIS unforced choice, this fond election of evil, would appear
perfectly unaccountable if we did not consider the composition of
the National Assembly. I do not mean its formal constitution, which,
as it now stands, is exceptionable enough, but the materials of which,
in a great measure, it is composed, which is of ten thousand times
greater consequence than all the formalities in the world. If we
were to know nothing of this assembly but by its title and function,
no colors could paint to the imagination anything more venerable. In
that light the mind of an inquirer, subdued by such an awful image
as that of the virtue and wisdom of a whole people collected into a
focus, would pause and hesitate in condemning things even of the
very worst aspect. Instead of blamable, they would appear only
mysterious. But no name, no power, no function, no artificial
institution whatsoever can make the men of whom any system of
authority is composed any other than God, and nature, and education,
and their habits of life have made them. Capacities beyond these the
people have not to give. Virtue and wisdom may be the objects of their
choice, but their choice confers neither the one nor the other on
those upon whom they lay their ordaining hands. They have not the
engagement of nature, they have not the promise of revelation, for any
    After I had read over the list of the persons and descriptions
elected into the Tiers Etat, nothing which they afterwards did could
appear astonishing. Among them, indeed, I saw some of known rank, some
of shining talents; but of any practical experience in the state,
not one man was to be found. The best were only men of theory. But
whatever the distinguished few may have been, it is the substance
and mass of the body which constitutes its character and must
finally determine its direction. In all bodies, those who will lead
must also, in a considerable degree, follow. They must conform their
propositions to the taste, talent, and disposition of those whom
they wish to conduct; therefore, if an assembly is viciously or feebly
composed in a very great part of it, nothing but such a supreme degree
of virtue as very rarely appears in the world, and for that reason
cannot enter into calculation, will prevent the men of talent
disseminated through it from becoming only the expert instruments of
absurd projects! If, what is the more likely event, instead of that
unusual degree of virtue, they should be actuated by sinister ambition
and a lust of meretricious glory, then the feeble part of the
assembly, to whom at first they conform, becomes in its turn the
dupe and instrument of their designs. In this political traffic, the
leaders will be obliged to bow to the ignorance of their followers,
and the followers to become subservient to the worst designs of
    To secure any degree of sobriety in the propositions made by the
leaders in any public assembly, they ought to respect, in some
degree perhaps to fear, those whom they conduct. To be led any
otherwise than blindly, the followers must be qualified, if not for
actors, at least for judges; they must also be judges of natural
weight and authority. Nothing can secure a steady and moderate conduct
in such assemblies but that the body of them should be respectably
composed, in point of condition in life or permanent property, of
education, and of such habits as enlarge and liberalize the
    In the calling of the States-General of France, the first thing
that struck me was a great departure from the ancient course. I
found the representation for the Third Estate composed of six
hundred persons. They were equal in number to the representatives of
both the other orders. If the orders were to act separately, the
number would not, beyond the consideration of the expense, be of
much moment. But when it became apparent that the three orders were to
be melted down into one, the policy and necessary effect of this
numerous representation became obvious. A very small desertion from
either of the other two orders must throw the power of both into the
hands of the third. In fact, the whole power of the state was soon
resolved into that body. Its due composition became therefore of
    Judge, Sir, of my surprise when I found that a very great
proportion of the assembly (a majority, I believe, of the members
who attended) was composed of practitioners in the law. It was
composed, not of distinguished magistrates, who had given pledges to
their country of their science, prudence, and integrity; not of
leading advocates, the glory of the bar; not of renowned professors in
universities;- but for the far greater part, as it must in such a
number, of the inferior, unlearned, mechanical, merely instrumental
members of the profession. There were distinguished exceptions, but
the general composition was of obscure provincial advocates, of
stewards of petty local jurisdictions, country attornies, notaries,
and the whole train of the ministers of municipal litigation, the
fomenters and conductors of the petty war of village vexation. From
the moment I read the list, I saw distinctly, and very nearly as it
    The degree of estimation in which any profession is held becomes
the standard of the estimation in which the professors hold
themselves. Whatever the personal merits of many individual lawyers
might have been, and in many it was undoubtedly very considerable,
in that military kingdom no part of the profession had been much
regarded except the highest of all, who often united to their
professional offices great family splendor, and were invested with
great power and authority. These certainly were highly respected,
and even with no small degree of awe. The next rank was not much
esteemed; the mechanical part was in a very low degree of repute.
    Whenever the supreme authority is vested in a body so composed, it
must evidently produce the consequences of supreme authority placed in
the hands of men not taught habitually to respect themselves, who
had no previous fortune in character at stake, who could not be
expected to bear with moderation, or to conduct with discretion, a
power which they themselves, more than any others, must be surprised
to find in their hands. Who could flatter himself that these men,
suddenly and, as it were, by enchantment snatched from the humblest
rank of subordination, would not be intoxicated with their
unprepared greatness? Who could conceive that men who are habitually
meddling, daring, subtle, active, of litigious dispositions and
unquiet minds would easily fall back into their old condition of
obscure contention and laborious, low, unprofitable chicane? Who could
doubt but that, at any expense to the state, of which they
understood nothing, they must pursue their private interests, which
they understand but too well? It was not an event depending on
chance or contingency. It was inevitable; it was necessary; it was
planted in the nature of things. They must join (if their capacity did
not permit them to lead) in any project which could procure to them
a litigious constitution; which could lay open to them those
innumerable lucrative jobs which follow in the train of all great
convulsions and revolutions in the state, and particularly in all
great and violent permutations of property. Was it to be expected that
they would attend to the stability of property, whose existence had
always depended upon whatever rendered property questionable,
ambiguous, and insecure? Their objects would be enlarged with their
elevation, but their disposition and habits, and mode of accomplishing
    Well! but these men were to be tempered and restrained by other
descriptions, of more sober and more enlarged understandings. Were
they then to be awed by the supereminent authority and awful dignity
of a handful of country clowns who have seats in that assembly, some
of whom are said not to be able to read and write, and by not a
greater number of traders who, though somewhat more instructed and
more conspicuous in the order of society, had never known anything
beyond their counting house? No! Both these descriptions were more
formed to be overborne and swayed by the intrigues and artifices of
lawyers than to become their counterpoise. With such a dangerous
disproportion, the whole must needs be governed by them. To the
faculty of law was joined a pretty considerable proportion of the
faculty of medicine. This faculty had not, any more than that of the
law, possessed in France its just estimation. Its professors,
therefore, must have the qualities of men not habituated to sentiments
of dignity. But supposing they had ranked as they ought to do, and
as with us they do actually, the sides of sickbeds are not the
academies for forming statesmen and legislators. Then came the dealers
in stocks and funds, who must be eager, at any expense, to change
their ideal paper wealth for the more solid substance of land. To
these were joined men of other descriptions, from whom as little
knowledge of, or attention to, the interests of a great state was to
be expected, and as little regard to the stability of any institution;
men formed to be instruments, not controls. Such in general was the
composition of the Tiers Etat in the National Assembly, in which was
scarcely to be perceived the slightest traces of what we call the
    We know that the British House of Commons, without shutting its
doors to any merit in any class, is, by the sure operation of adequate
causes, filled with everything illustrious in rank, in descent, in
hereditary and in acquired opulence, in cultivated talents, in
military, civil, naval, and politic distinction that the country can
afford. But supposing, what hardly can be supposed as a case, that the
House of Commons should be composed in the same manner with the
Tiers Etat in France, would this dominion of chicane be borne with
patience or even conceived without horror? God forbid I should
insinuate anything derogatory to that profession which is another
priesthood, administering the rights of sacred justice. But whilst I
revere men in the functions which belong to them, and would do as much
as one man can do to prevent their exclusion from any, I cannot, to
flatter them, give the lie to nature. They are good and useful in
the composition; they must be mischievous if they preponderate so as
virtually to become the whole. Their very excellence in their peculiar
functions may be far from a qualification for others. It cannot escape
observation that when men are too much confined to professional and
faculty habits and, as it were, inveterate in the recurrent employment
of that narrow circle, they are rather disabled than qualified for
whatever depends on the knowledge of mankind, on experience in mixed
affairs, on a comprehensive, connected view of the various,
complicated, external and internal interests which go to the formation
    After all, if the House of Commons were to have a wholly
professional and faculty composition, what is the power of the House
of Commons, circumscribed and shut in by the immovable barriers of
laws, usages, positive rules of doctrine and practice, counterpoised
by the House of Lords, and every moment of its existence at the
discretion of the crown to continue, prorogue, or dissolve us? The
power of the House of Commons, direct or indirect, is indeed great;
and long may it be able to preserve its greatness and the spirit
belonging to true greatness at the full; and it will do so as long
as it can keep the breakers of law in India from becoming the makers
of law for England. The power, however, of the House of Commons,
when least diminished, is as a drop of water in the ocean, compared to
that residing in a settled majority of your National Assembly. That
assembly, since the destruction of the orders, has no fundamental law,
no strict convention, no respected usage to restrain it. Instead of
finding themselves obliged to conform to a fixed constitution, they
have a power to make a constitution which shall conform to their
designs. Nothing in heaven or upon earth can serve as a control on
them. What ought to be the heads, the hearts, the dispositions that
are qualified or that dare, not only to make laws under a fixed
constitution, but at one heat to strike out a totally new constitution
for a great kingdom, and in every part of it, from the monarch on
the throne to the vestry of a parish? But- "fools rush in where angels
fear to tread". In such a state of unbounded power for undefined and
undefinable purposes, the evil of a moral and almost physical
inaptitude of the man to the function must be the greatest we can
conceive to happen in the management of human affairs.
    Having considered the composition of the Third Estate as it
stood in its original frame, I took a view of the representatives of
the clergy. There, too, it appeared that full as little regard was had
to the general security of property or to the aptitude of the deputies
for the public purposes, in the principles of their election. That
election was so contrived as to send a very large proportion of mere
country curates to the great and arduous work of new-modeling a state:
men who never had seen the state so much as in a picture- men who knew
nothing of the world beyond the bounds of an obscure village; who,
immersed in hopeless poverty, could regard all property, whether
secular or ecclesiastical, with no other eye than that of envy;
among whom must be many who, for the smallest hope of the meanest
dividend in plunder, would readily join in any attempts upon a body of
wealth in which they could hardly look to have any share except in a
general scramble. Instead of balancing the power of the active
chicaners in the other assembly, these curates must necessarily become
the active coadjutors, or at best the passive instruments, of those by
whom they had been habitually guided in their petty village
concerns. They, too, could hardly be the most conscientious of their
kind who, presuming upon their incompetent understanding, could
intrigue for a trust which led them from their natural relation to
their flocks and their natural spheres of action to undertake the
regeneration of kingdoms. This preponderating weight, being added to
the force of the body of chicane in the Tiers Etat, completed that
momentum of ignorance, rashness, presumption, and lust of plunder,
    To observing men it must have appeared from the beginning that the
majority of the Third Estate, in conjunction with such a deputation
from the clergy as I have described, whilst it pursued the destruction
of the nobility, would inevitably become subservient to the worst
designs of individuals in that class. In the spoil and humiliation
of their own order these individuals would possess a sure fund for the
pay of their new followers. To squander away the objects which made
the happiness of their fellows would be to them no sacrifice at all.
Turbulent, discontented men of quality, in proportion as they are
puffed up with personal pride and arrogance, generally despise their
own order. One of the first symptoms they discover of a selfish and
mischievous ambition is a profligate disregard of a dignity which they
partake with others. To be attached to the subdivision, to love the
little platoon we belong to in society, is the first principle (the
germ as it were) of public affections. It is the first link in the
series by which we proceed toward a love to our country and to
mankind. The interest of that portion of social arrangement is a trust
in the hands of all those who compose it; and as none but bad men
would justify it in abuse, none but traitors would barter it away
    There were in the time of our civil troubles in England (I do
not know whether you have any such in your assembly in France) several
persons, like the then Earl of Holland, who by themselves or their
families had brought an odium on the throne by the prodigal
dispensation of its bounties toward them, who afterwards joined in the
rebellions arising from the discontents of which they were
themselves the cause; men who helped to subvert that throne to which
they owed, some of them, their existence, others all that power
which they employed to ruin their benefactor. If any bounds are set to
the rapacious demands of that sort of people, or that others are
permitted to partake in the objects they would engross, revenge and
envy soon fill up the craving void that is left in their avarice.
Confounded by the complication of distempered passions, their reason
is disturbed; their views become vast and perplexed; to others
inexplicable, to themselves uncertain. They find, on all sides, bounds
to their unprincipled ambition in any fixed order of things. Both in
the fog and haze of confusion all is enlarged and appears without
    When men of rank sacrifice all ideas of dignity to an ambition
without a distinct object and work with low instruments and for low
ends, the whole composition becomes low and base. Does not something
like this now appear in France? Does it not produce something
ignoble and inglorious- a kind of meanness in all the prevalent
policy, a tendency in all that is done to lower along with individuals
all the dignity and importance of the state? Other revolutions have
been conducted by persons who, whilst they attempted or affected
changes in the commonwealth, sanctified their ambition by advancing
the dignity of the people whose peace they troubled. They had long
views. They aimed at the rule, not at the destruction, of their
country. They were men of great civil and great military talents,
and if the terror, the ornament of their age. They were not like Jew
brokers, contending with each other who could best remedy with
fraudulent circulation and depreciated paper the wretchedness and ruin
brought on their country by their degenerate councils. The
compliment made to one of the great bad men of the old stamp
(Cromwell) by his kinsman, a favorite poet of that time, shows what it
was he proposed, and what indeed to a great degree he accomplished, in
        Finds no distemper whilst 'tis changed by you;
        Changed like the world's great scene, when without noise
        The rising sun night's vulgar lights destroys.
    These disturbers were not so much like men usurping power as
asserting their natural place in society. Their rising was to
illuminate and beautify the world. Their conquest over their
competitors was by outshining them. The hand that, like a destroying
angel, smote the country communicated to it the force and energy under
which it suffered. I do not say (God forbid), I do not say that the
virtues of such men were to be taken as a balance to their crimes; but
they were some corrective to their effects. Such was, as I said, our
Cromwell. Such were your whole race of Guises, Condes, and Colignis.
Such the Richelieus, who in more quiet times acted in the spirit of
a civil war. Such, as better men, and in a less dubious cause, were
your Henry the Fourth and your Sully, though nursed in civil
confusions and not wholly without some of their taint. It is a thing
to be wondered at, to see how very soon France, when she had a
moment to respire, recovered and emerged from the longest and most
dreadful civil war that ever was known in any nation. Why? Because
among all their massacres they had not slain the mind in their
country. A conscious dignity, a noble pride, a generous sense of glory
and emulation was not extinguished. On the contrary, it was kindled
and inflamed. The organs also of the state, however shattered,
existed. All the prizes of honor and virtue, all the rewards, all
the distinctions remained. But your present confusion, like a palsy,
has attacked the fountain of life itself. Every person in your
country, in a situation to be actuated by a principle of honor, is
disgraced and degraded, and can entertain no sensation of life
except in a mortified and humiliated indignation. But this
generation will quickly pass away. The next generation of the nobility
will resemble the artificers and clowns, and money-jobbers usurers,
and Jews, who will be always their fellows, sometimes their masters.
    BELIEVE ME, SIR, those who attempt to level, never equalize. In
all societies, consisting of various descriptions of citizens, some
description must be uppermost. The levelers, therefore, only change
and pervert the natural order of things; they load the edifice of
society by setting up in the air what the solidity of the structure
requires to be on the ground. The association of tailors and
carpenters, of which the republic (of Paris, for instance) is
composed, cannot be equal to the situation into which by the worst
of usurpations- an usurpation on the prerogatives of nature- you
    The Chancellor of France, at the opening of the states, said, in a
tone of oratorical flourish, that all occupations were honorable. If
he meant only that no honest employment was disgraceful, he would
not have gone beyond the truth. But in asserting that anything is
honorable, we imply some distinction in its favor. The occupation of a
hairdresser or of a working tallow-chandler cannot be a matter of
honor to any person- to say nothing of a number of other more
servile employments. Such descriptions of men ought not to suffer
oppression from the state; but the state suffers oppression if such as
they, either individually or collectively, are permitted to rule. In
this you think you are combating prejudice, but you are at war with
    * Ecclesiasticus, chap. xxxviii. verses 24, 25. "The wisdom of a
learned man cometh by opportunity of leisure; and he that hath
little business shall become wise".- "How can he get wisdom that
holdeth the plough, and that glorieth in the goad; that driveth
oxen; and is occupied in their labours; and whose talk is of
    Ver. 27. "So every carpenter and work-master that laboureth
    Ver. 33. "They shall not be sought for in public counsel, nor
sit high in the congregation: they shall not sit on the judge's
seat, nor understand the sentence of judgment; they cannot declare
justice and judgment, and they shall not be found where parables are
    Ver. 34. "But they will maintain the state of the world".
    I do not determine whether this book be canonical, as the Gallican
church (till lately) has considered it, or apocryphal, as here it is
taken. I am sure it contains a great deal of sense and truth.
    I do not, my dear Sir, conceive you to be of that sophistical,
captious spirit, or of that uncandid dulness, as to require, for every
general observation or sentiment, an explicit detail of the
correctives and exceptions which reason will presume to be included in
all the general propositions which come from reasonable men. You do
not imagine that I wish to confine power, authority, and distinction
to blood and names and titles. No, Sir. There is no qualification
for government but virtue and wisdom, actual or presumptive.
Wherever they are actually found, they have, in whatever state,
condition, profession, or trade, the passport of Heaven to human place
and honor. Woe to the country which would madly and impiously reject
the service of the talents and virtues, civil, military, or religious,
that are given to grace and to serve it, and would condemn to
obscurity everything formed to diffuse luster and glory around a
state. Woe to that country, too, that, passing into the opposite
extreme, considers a low education, a mean contracted view of
things, a sordid, mercenary occupation as a preferable title to
command. Everything ought to be open, but not indifferently, to
every man. No rotation; no appointment by lot; no mode of election
operating in the spirit of sortition or rotation can be generally good
in a government conversant in extensive objects. Because they have
no tendency, direct or indirect, to select the man with a view to
the duty or to accommodate the one to the other. I do not hesitate
to say that the road to eminence and power, from obscure condition,
ought not to be made too easy, nor a thing too much of course. If rare
merit be the rarest of all rare things, it ought to pass through
some sort of probation. The temple of honor ought to be seated on an
eminence. If it be opened through virtue, let it be remembered, too,
that virtue is never tried but by some difficulty and some struggle.
    Nothing is a due and adequate representation of a state that
does not represent its ability as well as its property. But as ability
is a vigorous and active principle, and as property is sluggish,
inert, and timid, it never can be safe from the invasion of ability
unless it be, out of all proportion, predominant in the
representation. It must be represented, too, in great masses of
accumulation, or it is not rightly protected. The characteristic
essence of property, formed out of the combined principles of its
acquisition and conservation, is to be unequal. The great masses,
therefore, which excite envy and tempt rapacity must be put out of the
possibility of danger. Then they form a natural rampart about the
lesser properties in all their gradations. The same quantity of
property, which is by the natural course of things divided among many,
has not the same operation. Its defensive power is weakened as it is
diffused. In this diffusion each man's portion is less than what, in
the eagerness of his desires, he may flatter himself to obtain by
dissipating the accumulations of others. The plunder of the few
would indeed give but a share inconceivably small in the
distribution to the many. But the many are not capable of making
this calculation; and those who lead them to rapine never intend
    The power of perpetuating our property in our families is one of
the most valuable and interesting circumstances belonging to it, and
that which tends the most to the perpetuation of society itself. It
makes our weakness subservient to our virtue, it grafts benevolence
even upon avarice. The possessors of family wealth, and of the
distinction which attends hereditary possession (as most concerned
in it), are the natural securities for this transmission. With us
the House of Peers is formed upon this principle. It is wholly
composed of hereditary property and hereditary distinction, and
made, therefore, the third of the legislature and, in the last
event, the sole judge of all property in all its subdivisions. The
House of Commons, too, though not necessarily, yet in fact, is
always so composed, in the far greater part. Let those large
proprietors be what they will- and they have their chance of being
amongst the best- they are, at the very worst, the ballast in the
vessel of the commonwealth. For though hereditary wealth and the
rank which goes with it are too much idolized by creeping sycophants
and the blind, abject admirers of power, they are too rashly
slighted in shallow speculations of the petulant, assuming,
short-sighted coxcombs of philosophy. Some decent, regulated
preeminence, some preference (not exclusive appropriation) given to
birth is neither unnatural, nor unjust, nor impolitic.
    IT is said that twenty-four millions ought to prevail over two
hundred thousand. True; if the constitution of a kingdom be a
problem of arithmetic. This sort of discourse does well enough with
the lamp-post for its second; to men who may reason calmly, it is
ridiculous. The will of the many and their interest must very often
differ, and great will be the difference when they make an evil
choice. A government of five hundred country attornies and obscure
curates is not good for twenty-four millions of men, though it were
chosen by eight and forty millions, nor is it the better for being
guided by a dozen of persons of quality who have betrayed their
trust in order to obtain that power. At present, you seem in
everything to have strayed out of the high road of nature. The
property of France does not govern it. Of course, property is
destroyed and rational liberty has no existence. All you have got
for the present is a paper circulation and a stock-jobbing
constitution; and as to the future, do you seriously think that the
territory of France, upon the republican system of eighty-three
independent municipalities (to say nothing of the parts that compose
them), can ever be governed as one body or can ever be set in motion
by the impulse of one mind? When the National Assembly has completed
its work, it will have accomplished its ruin. These commonwealths will
not long bear a state of subjection to the republic of Paris. They
will not bear that this body should monopolize the captivity of the
king and the dominion over the assembly calling itself national.
Each will keep its own portion of the spoil of the church to itself,
and it will not suffer either that spoil, or the more just fruits of
their industry, or the natural produce of their soil to be sent to
swell the insolence or pamper the luxury of the mechanics of Paris. In
this they will see none of the equality, under the pretense of which
they have been tempted to throw off their allegiance to their
sovereign as well as the ancient constitution of their country.
There can be no capital city in such a constitution as they have
lately made. They have forgot that, when they framed democratic
governments, they had virtually dismembered their country. The
person whom they persevere in calling king has not power left to him
by the hundredth part sufficient to hold together this collection of
republics. The republic of Paris will endeavor, indeed, to complete
the debauchery of the army, and illegally to perpetuate the
assembly, without resort to its constituents, as the means of
continuing its despotism. It will make efforts, by becoming the
heart of a boundless paper circulation, to draw everything to
itself; but in vain. All this policy in the end will appear as
    IF this be your actual situation, compared to the situation to
which you were called, as it were, by the voice of God and man, I
cannot find it in my heart to congratulate you on the choice you
have made or the success which has attended your endeavors. I can as
little recommend to any other nation a conduct grounded on such
principles, and productive of such effects. That I must leave to those
who can see farther into your affairs than I am able to do, and who
best know how far your actions are favorable to their designs. The
gentlemen of the Revolution Society, who were so early in their
congratulations, appear to be strongly of opinion that there is some
scheme of politics relative to this country in which your
proceedings may, in some way, be useful. For your Dr. Price, who seems
to have speculated himself into no small degree of fervor upon this
subject, addresses his auditory in the following very remarkable
words: "I cannot conclude without recalling particularly to your
recollection a consideration which I have more than once alluded to,
and which probably your thoughts have been all along anticipating; a
consideration with which my mind is impressed more than I can express.
I mean the consideration of the favourableness of the present times to
    It is plain that the mind of this political preacher was at the
time big with some extraordinary design; and it is very probable
that the thoughts of his audience, who understood him better than I
do, did all along run before him in his reflection and in the whole
    Before I read that sermon, I really thought I had lived in a
free country; and it was an error I cherished, because it gave me a
greater liking to the country I lived in. I was, indeed, aware that
a jealous, ever-waking vigilance to guard the treasure of our liberty,
not only from invasion, but from decay and corruption, was our best
wisdom and our first duty. However, I considered that treasure
rather as a possession to be secured than as a prize to be contended
for. I did not discern how the present time came to be so very
favorable to all exertions in the cause of freedom. The present time
differs from any other only by the circumstance of what is doing in
France. If the example of that nation is to have an influence on this,
I can easily conceive why some of their proceedings which have an
unpleasant aspect and are not quite reconcilable to humanity,
generosity, good faith, and justice are palliated with so much milky
good-nature toward the actors, and borne with so much heroic fortitude
toward the sufferers. It is certainly not prudent to discredit the
authority of an example we mean to follow. But allowing this, we are
led to a very natural question: What is that cause of liberty, and
what are those exertions in its favor to which the example of France
is so singularly auspicious? Is our monarchy to be annihilated, with
all the laws, all the tribunals, and all the ancient corporations of
the kingdom? Is every landmark of the country to be done away in favor
of a geometrical and arithmetical constitution? Is the House of
Lords to be voted useless? Is episcopacy to be abolished? Are the
church lands to be sold to Jews and jobbers or given to bribe
new-invented municipal republics into a participation in sacrilege?
Are all the taxes to be voted grievances, and the revenue reduced to a
patriotic contribution or patriotic presents? Are silver shoebuckles
to be substituted in the place of the land tax and the malt tax for
the support of the naval strength of this kingdom? Are all orders,
ranks, and distinctions to be confounded, that out of universal
anarchy, joined to national bankruptcy, three or four thousand
democracies should be formed into eighty-three, and that they may all,
by some sort of unknown attractive power, be organized into one? For
this great end, is the army to be seduced from its discipline and
its fidelity, first, by every kind of debauchery and, then, by the
terrible precedent of a donative in the increase of pay? Are the
curates to be seduced from their bishops by holding out to them the
delusive hope of a dole out of the spoils of their own order? Are
the citizens of London to be drawn from their allegiance by feeding
them at the expense of their fellow subjects? Is a compulsory paper
currency to be substituted in the place of the legal coin of this
kingdom? Is what remains of the plundered stock of public revenue to
be employed in the wild project of maintaining two armies to watch
over and to fight with each other? If these are the ends and means
of the Revolution Society, I admit that they are well assorted; and
France may furnish them for both with precedents in point.
    I see that your example is held out to shame us. I know that we
are supposed a dull, sluggish race, rendered passive by finding our
situation tolerable, and prevented by a mediocrity of freedom from
ever attaining to its full perfection. Your leaders in France began by
affecting to admire, almost to adore, the British constitution; but as
they advanced, they came to look upon it with a sovereign contempt.
The friends of your National Assembly amongst us have full as mean
an opinion of what was formerly thought the glory of their country.
The Revolution Society has discovered that the English nation is not
free. They are convinced that the inequality in our representation
is a "defect in our constitution so gross and palpable as to make it
excellent chiefly in form and theory".* That a representation in the
legislature of a kingdom is not only the basis of all constitutional
liberty in it, but of "all legitimate government; that without it a
government is nothing but an usurpation";- that "when the
representation is partial, the kingdom possesses liberty only
partially; and if extremely partial, it gives only a semblance; and if
not only extremely partial, but corruptly chosen, it becomes a
nuisance". Dr. Price considers this inadequacy of representation as
our fundamental grievance; and though, as to the corruption of this
semblance of representation, he hopes it is not yet arrived to its
full perfection of depravity, he fears that "nothing will be done
towards gaining for us this essential blessing, until some great abuse
of power again provokes our resentment, or some great calamity again
alarms our fears, or perhaps till the acquisition of a pure and
equal representation by other countries, whilst we are mocked with the
shadow, kindles our shame." To this he subjoins a note in these words.
"A representation chosen chiefly by the treasury, and a few
thousands of the dregs of the people, who are generally paid for their
    * Discourse on the Love of our Country, 3d ed., p. 39.
    You will smile here at the consistency of those democratists
who, when they are not on their guard, treat the humbler part of the
community with the greatest contempt, whilst, at the same time, they
pretend to make them the depositories of all power. It would require a
long discourse to point out to you the many fallacies that lurk in the
generality and equivocal nature of the terms "inadequate
representation". I shall only say here, in justice to that
old-fashioned constitution under which we have long prospered, that
our representation has been found perfectly adequate to all the
purposes for which a representation of the people can be desired or
devised. I defy the enemies of our constitution to show the
contrary. To detail the particulars in which it is found so well to
promote its ends would demand a treatise on our practical
constitution. I state here the doctrine of the Revolutionists only
that you and others may see what an opinion these gentlemen
entertain of the constitution of their country, and why they seem to
think that some great abuse of power or some great calamity, as giving
a chance for the blessing of a constitution according to their
ideas, would be much palliated to their feelings; you see why they are
so much enamored of your fair and equal representation, which being
once obtained, the same effects might follow. You see they consider
our House of Commons as only "a semblance", "a form", "a theory", "a
    These gentlemen value themselves on being systematic, and not
without reason. They must therefore look on this gross and palpable
defect of representation, this fundamental grievance (so they call it)
as a thing not only vicious in itself, but as rendering our whole
government absolutely illegitimate, and not at all better than a
downright usurpation. Another revolution, to get rid of this
illegitimate and usurped government, would of course be perfectly
justifiable, if not absolutely necessary. Indeed, their principle,
if you observe it with any attention, goes much further than to an
alteration in the election of the House of Commons; for, if popular
representation, or choice, is necessary to the legitimacy of all
government, the House of Lords is, at one stroke, bastardized and
corrupted in blood. That House is no representative of the people at
all, even in "semblance or in form". The case of the crown is
altogether as bad. In vain the crown may endeavor to screen itself
against these gentlemen by the authority of the establishment made
on the Revolution. The Revolution which is resorted to for a title, on
their system, wants a title itself. The Revolution is built, according
to their theory, upon a basis not more solid than our present
formalities, as it was made by a House of Lords, not representing
any one but themselves, and by a House of Commons exactly such as
the present, that is, as they term it, by a mere "shadow and
    Something they must destroy, or they seem to themselves to exist
for no purpose. One set is for destroying the civil power through
the ecclesiastical; another, for demolishing the ecclesiastic
through the civil. They are aware that the worst consequences might
happen to the public in accomplishing this double ruin of church and
state, but they are so heated with their theories that they give
more than hints that this ruin, with all the mischiefs that must
lead to it and attend it, and which to themselves appear quite
certain, would not be unacceptable to them or very remote from their
wishes. A man amongst them of great authority and certainly of great
talents, speaking of a supposed alliance between church and state,
says, "perhaps we must wait for the fall of the civil powers before
this most unnatural alliance be broken. Calamitous no doubt will
that time be. But what convulsion in the political world ought to be a
subject of lamentation if it be attended with so desirable an effect?"
You see with what a steady eye these gentlemen are prepared to view
the greatest calamities which can befall their country.
    IT is no wonder, therefore, that with these ideas of everything in
their constitution and government at home, either in church or
state, as illegitimate and usurped, or at best as a vain mockery, they
look abroad with an eager and passionate enthusiasm. Whilst they are
possessed by these notions, it is vain to talk to them of the practice
of their ancestors, the fundamental laws of their country, the fixed
form of a constitution whose merits are confirmed by the solid test of
long experience and an increasing public strength and national
prosperity. They despise experience as the wisdom of unlettered men;
and as for the rest, they have wrought underground a mine that will
blow up, at one grand explosion, all examples of antiquity, all
precedents, charters, and acts of parliament. They have "the rights of
men". Against these there can be no prescription, against these no
agreement is binding; these admit no temperament and no compromise;
anything withheld from their full demand is so much of fraud and
injustice. Against these their rights of men let no government look
for security in the length of its continuance, or in the justice and
lenity of its administration. The objections of these speculatists, if
its forms do not quadrate with their theories, are as valid against
such an old and beneficent government as against the most violent
tyranny or the greenest usurpation. They are always at issue with
governments, not on a question of abuse, but a question of
competency and a question of title. I have nothing to say to the
clumsy subtilty of their political metaphysics. Let them be their
amusement in the schools.- "Illa se jactet in aula Aeolus, et clauso
ventorum carcere regnet".- But let them not break prison to burst like
a Levanter to sweep the earth with their hurricane and to break up the
    Far am I from denying in theory, full as far is my heart from
withholding in practice (if I were of power to give or to withhold)
the real rights of men. In denying their false claims of right, I do
not mean to injure those which are real, and are such as their
pretended rights would totally destroy. If civil society be made for
the advantage of man, all the advantages for which it is made become
his right. It is an institution of beneficence; and law itself is only
beneficence acting by a rule. Men have a right to live by that rule;
they have a right to do justice, as between their fellows, whether
their fellows are in public function or in ordinary occupation. They
have a right to the fruits of their industry and to the means of
making their industry fruitful. They have a right to the
acquisitions of their parents, to the nourishment and improvement of
their offspring, to instruction in life, and to consolation in
death. Whatever each man can separately do, without trespassing upon
others, he has a right to do for himself; and he has a right to a fair
portion of all which society, with all its combinations of skill and
force, can do in his favor. In this partnership all men have equal
rights, but not to equal things. He that has but five shillings in the
partnership has as good a right to it as he that has five hundred
pounds has to his larger proportion. But he has not a right to an
equal dividend in the product of the joint stock; and as to the
share of power, authority, and direction which each individual ought
to have in the management of the state, that I must deny to be amongst
the direct original rights of man in civil society; for I have in my
contemplation the civil social man, and no other. It is a thing to
    If civil society be the offspring of convention, that convention
must be its law. That convention must limit and modify all the
descriptions of constitution which are formed under it. Every sort
of legislative, judicial, or executory power are its creatures. They
can have no being in any other state of things; and how can any man
claim under the conventions of civil society rights which do not so
much as suppose its existence- rights which are absolutely repugnant
to it? One of the first motives to civil society, and which becomes
one of its fundamental rules, is that no man should be judge in his
own cause. By this each person has at once divested himself of the
first fundamental right of uncovenanted man, that is, to judge for
himself and to assert his own cause. He abdicates all right to be
his own governor. He inclusively, in a great measure, abandons the
right of self-defense, the first law of nature. Men cannot enjoy the
rights of an uncivil and of a civil state together. That he may obtain
justice, he gives up his right of determining what it is in points the
most essential to him. That he may secure some liberty, he makes a
    Government is not made in virtue of natural rights, which may
and do exist in total independence of it, and exist in much greater
clearness and in a much greater degree of abstract perfection; but
their abstract perfection is their practical defect. By having a right
to everything they want everything. Government is a contrivance of
human wisdom to provide for human wants. Men have a right that these
wants should be provided for by this wisdom. Among these wants is to
be reckoned the want, out of civil society, of a sufficient
restraint upon their passions. Society requires not only that the
passions of individuals should be subjected, but that even in the mass
and body, as well as in the individuals, the inclinations of men
should frequently be thwarted, their will controlled, and their
passions brought into subjection. This can only be done by a power out
of themselves, and not, in the exercise of its function, subject to
that will and to those passions which it is its office to bridle and
subdue. In this sense the restraints on men, as well as their
liberties, are to be reckoned among their rights. But as the liberties
and the restrictions vary with times and circumstances and admit to
infinite modifications, they cannot be settled upon any abstract rule;
and nothing is so foolish as to discuss them upon that principle.
    The moment you abate anything from the full rights of men, each to
govern himself, and suffer any artificial, positive limitation upon
those rights, from that moment the whole organization of government
becomes a consideration of convenience. This it is which makes the
constitution of a state and the due distribution of its powers a
matter of the most delicate and complicated skill. It requires a
deep knowledge of human nature and human necessities, and of the
things which facilitate or obstruct the various ends which are to be
pursued by the mechanism of civil institutions. The state is to have
recruits to its strength, and remedies to its distempers. What is
the use of discussing a man's abstract right to food or medicine?
The question is upon the method of procuring and administering them.
In that deliberation I shall always advise to call in the aid of the
farmer and the physician rather than the professor of metaphysics.
    The science of constructing a commonwealth, or renovating it, or
reforming it, is, like every other experimental science, not to be
taught a priori. Nor is it a short experience that can instruct us
in that practical science, because the real effects of moral causes
are not always immediate; but that which in the first instance is
prejudicial may be excellent in its remoter operation, and its
excellence may arise even from the ill effects it produces in the
beginning. The reverse also happens: and very plausible schemes,
with very pleasing commencements, have often shameful and lamentable
conclusions. In states there are often some obscure and almost
latent causes, things which appear at first view of little moment,
on which a very great part of its prosperity or adversity may most
essentially depend. The science of government being therefore so
practical in itself and intended for such practical purposes- a matter
which requires experience, and even more experience than any person
can gain in his whole life, however sagacious and observing he may be-
it is with infinite caution that any man ought to venture upon pulling
down an edifice which has answered in any tolerable degree for ages
the common purposes of society, or on building it up again without
having models and patterns of approved utility before his eyes.
    These metaphysic rights entering into common life, like rays of
light which pierce into a dense medium, are by the laws of nature
refracted from their straight line. Indeed, in the gross and
complicated mass of human passions and concerns the primitive rights
of men undergo such a variety of refractions and reflections that it
becomes absurd to talk of them as if they continued in the
simplicity of their original direction. The nature of man is
intricate; the objects of society are of the greatest possible
complexity; and, therefore, no simple disposition or direction of
power can be suitable either to man's nature or to the quality of
his affairs. When I hear the simplicity of contrivance aimed at and
boasted of in any new political constitutions, I am at no loss to
decide that the artificers are grossly ignorant of their trade or
totally negligent of their duty. The simple governments are
fundamentally defective, to say no worse of them. If you were to
contemplate society in but one point of view, all these simple modes
of polity are infinitely captivating. In effect each would answer
its single end much more perfectly than the more complex is able to
attain all its complex purposes. But it is better that the whole
should be imperfectly and anomalously answered than that, while some
parts are provided for with great exactness, others might be totally
neglected or perhaps materially injured by the over-care of a favorite
    The pretended rights of these theorists are all extremes; and in
proportion as they are metaphysically true, they are morally and
politically false. The rights of men are in a sort of middle,
incapable of definition, but not impossible to be discerned. The
rights of men in governments are their advantages; and these are often
in balances between differences of good, in compromises sometimes
between good and evil, and sometimes between evil and evil.
Political reason is a computing principle: adding, subtracting,
multiplying, and dividing, morally and not metaphysically or
    By these theorists the right of the people is almost always
sophistically confounded with their power. The body of the
community, whenever it can come to act, can meet with no effectual
resistance; but till power and right are the same, the whole body of
them has no right inconsistent with virtue, and the first of all
virtues, prudence. Men have no right to what is not reasonable and
to what is not for their benefit; for though a pleasant writer said,
liceat perire poetis, when one of them, in cold blood, is said to have
leaped into the flames of a volcanic revolution, ardentem frigidus
Aetnam insiluit, I consider such a frolic rather as an unjustifiable
poetic license than as one of the franchises of Parnassus; and whether
he was a poet, or divine, or politician that chose to exercise this
kind of right, I think that more wise, because more charitable,
thoughts would urge me rather to save the man than to preserve his
    The kind of anniversary sermons to which a great part of what I
write refers, if men are not shamed out of their present course in
commemorating the fact, will cheat many out of the principles, and
deprive them of the benefits, of the revolution they commemorate. I
confess to you, Sir, I never liked this continual talk of resistance
and revolution, or the practice of making the extreme medicine of
the constitution its daily bread. It renders the habit of society
dangerously valetudinary; it is taking periodical doses of mercury
sublimate and swallowing down repeated provocatives of cantharides
    This distemper of remedy, grown habitual, relaxes and wears out,
by a vulgar and prostituted use, the spring of that spirit which is to
be exerted on great occasions. It was in the most patient period of
Roman servitude that themes of tyrannicide made the ordinary
exercise of boys at school- cum perimit saevos classis numerosa
tyrannos. In the ordinary state of things, it produces in a country
like ours the worst effects, even on the cause of that liberty which
it abuses with the dissoluteness of an extravagant speculation. Almost
all the high-bred republicans of my time have, after a short space,
become the most decided, thorough-paced courtiers; they soon left
the business of a tedious, moderate, but practical resistance to those
of us whom, in the pride and intoxication of their theories, they have
slighted as not much better than Tories. Hypocrisy, of course,
delights in the most sublime speculations, for, never intending to
go beyond speculation, it costs nothing to have it magnificent. But
even in cases where rather levity than fraud was to be suspected in
these ranting speculations, the issue has been much the same. These
professors, finding their extreme principles not applicable to cases
which call only for a qualified or, as I may say, civil and legal
resistance, in such cases employ no resistance at all. It is with them
a war or a revolution, or it is nothing. Finding their schemes of
politics not adapted to the state of the world in which they live,
they often come to think lightly of all public principle, and are
ready, on their part, to abandon for a very trivial interest what they
find of very trivial value. Some, indeed, are of more steady and
persevering natures, but these are eager politicians out of parliament
who have little to tempt them to abandon their favorite projects. They
have some change in the church or state, or both, constantly in
their view. When that is the case, they are always bad citizens and
perfectly unsure connections. For, considering their speculative
designs as of infinite value, and the actual arrangement of the
state as of no estimation, they are at best indifferent about it. They
see no merit in the good, and no fault in the vicious, management of
public affairs; they rather rejoice in the latter, as more
propitious to revolution. They see no merit or demerit in any man,
or any action, or any political principle any further than as they may
forward or retard their design of change; they therefore take up,
one day, the most violent and stretched prerogative, and another
time the wildest democratic ideas of freedom, and pass from one to the
other without any sort of regard to cause, to person, or to party.
    IN FRANCE, you are now in the crisis of a revolution and in the
transit from one form of government to another- you cannot see that
character of men exactly in the same situation in which we see it in
this country. With us it is militant; with you it is triumphant; and
you know how it can act when its power is commensurate to its will.
I would not be supposed to confine those observations to any
description of men or to comprehend all men of any description
within them- No! far from it. I am as incapable of that injustice as I
am of keeping terms with those who profess principles of extremities
and who, under the name of religion, teach little else than wild and
dangerous politics. The worst of these politics of revolution is this:
they temper and harden the breast in order to prepare it for the
desperate strokes which are sometimes used in extreme occasions. But
as these occasions may never arrive, the mind receives a gratuitous
taint; and the moral sentiments suffer not a little when no
political purpose is served by the depravation. This sort of people
are so taken up with their theories about the rights of man that
they have totally forgotten his nature. Without opening one new avenue
to the understanding, they have succeeded in stopping up those that
lead to the heart. They have perverted in themselves, and in those
that attend to them, all the well-placed sympathies of the human
    This famous sermon of the Old Jewry breathes nothing but this
spirit through all the political part. Plots, massacres,
assassinations seem to some people a trivial price for obtaining a
revolution. Cheap, bloodless reformation, a guiltless liberty appear
flat and vapid to their taste. There must be a great change of
scene; there must be a magnificent stage effect; there must be a grand
spectacle to rouse the imagination grown torpid with the lazy
enjoyment of sixty years' security and the still unanimating repose of
public prosperity. The preacher found them all in the French
Revolution. This inspires a juvenile warmth through his whole frame.
His enthusiasm kindles as he advances; and when he arrives at his
peroration it is in a full blaze. Then viewing, from the Pisgah of his
pulpit, the free, moral, happy, flourishing and glorious state of
France as in a bird's-eye landscape of a promised land, he breaks
out into the following rapture: What an eventful period is this! I
am thankful that I have lived to it; I could almost say, Lord, now
lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen
thy salvation.- I have lived to see a diffusion of knowledge, which
has undermined superstition and error.- I have lived to see the rights
of men better understood than ever; and nations panting for liberty
which seemed to have lost the idea of it.- I have lived to see
thirty millions of people, indignant and resolute, spurning at
slavery, and demanding liberty with an irresistible voice. Their
king led in triumph and an arbitrary monarch surrendering himself to
    * Another of these reverend gentlemen, who was witness to some
of the spectacles which Paris has lately exhibited, expresses
himself thus:- "A king dragged in submissive triumph by his conquering
subjects, is one of those appearances of grandeur which seldom rise in
the prospect of human affairs, and which, during the remainder of my
life, I shall think of with wonder and gratification". These gentlemen
    Before I proceed further, I have to remark that Dr. Price seems
rather to overvalue the great acquisitions of light which he has
obtained and diffused in this age. The last century appears to me to
have been quite as much enlightened. It had, though in a different
place, a triumph as memorable as that of Dr. Price; and some of the
great preachers of that period partook of it as eagerly as he has done
in the triumph of France. On the trial of the Rev. Hugh Peters for
high treason, it was deposed that, when King Charles was brought to
London for his trial, the Apostle of Liberty in that day conducted the
triumph. "I saw", says the witness, "his Majesty in the coach with six
horses, and Peters riding before the king, triumphing". Dr. Price,
when he talks as if he had made a discovery, only follows a precedent,
for after the commencement of the king's trial this precursor, the
same Dr. Peters, concluding a long prayer at the Royal Chapel at
Whitehall (he had very triumphantly chosen his place), said, "I have
prayed and preached these twenty years; and now I may say with old
Simeon, Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine
eyes have seen thy salvation".* Peters had not the fruits of his
prayer, for he neither departed so soon as he wished, nor in peace. He
became (what I heartily hope none of his followers may be in this
country) himself a sacrifice to the triumph which he led as pontiff.
    They dealt at the Restoration, perhaps, too hardly with this
poor good man. But we owe it to his memory and his sufferings that
he had as much illumination and as much zeal, and had as effectually
undermined all the superstition and error which might impede the great
business he was engaged in, as any who follow and repeat after him
in this age, which would assume to itself an exclusive title to the
knowledge of the rights of men and all the glorious consequences of
    After this sally of the preacher of the Old Jewry, which differs
only in place and time, but agrees perfectly with the spirit and
letter of the rapture of 1648, the Revolution Society, the fabricators
of governments, the heroic band of cashierers of monarchs, electors of
sovereigns, and leaders of kings in triumph, strutting with a proud
consciousness of the diffusion of knowledge of which every member
had obtained so large a share in the donative, were in haste to make a
generous diffusion of the knowledge they had thus gratuitously
received. To make this bountiful communication, they adjourned from
the church in the Old Jewry to the London Tavern, where the same Dr.
Price, in whom the fumes of his oracular tripod were not entirely
evaporated, moved and carried the resolution or address of
congratulation transmitted by Lord Stanhope to the National Assembly
    I find a preacher of the gospel profaning the beautiful and
prophetic ejaculation, commonly called "nunc dimittis", made on the
first presentation of our Saviour in the Temple, and applying it
with an inhuman and unnatural rapture to the most horrid, atrocious,
and afflicting spectacle that perhaps ever was exhibited to the pity
and indignation of mankind. This "leading in triumph", a thing in
its best form unmanly and irreligious, which fills our preacher with
such unhallowed transports, must shock, I believe, the moral taste
of every well-born mind. Several English were the stupefied and
indignant spectators of that triumph. It was (unless we have been
strangely deceived) a spectacle more resembling a procession of
American savages, entering into Onondaga after some of their murders
called victories and leading into hovels hung round with scalps
their captives, overpowered with the scoffs and buffets of women as
ferocious as themselves, much more than it resembled the triumphal
pomp of a civilized martial nation- if a civilized nation, or any
men who had a sense of generosity, were capable of a personal
    THIS, MY DEAR SIR, was not the triumph of France. I must believe
that, as a nation, it overwhelmed you with shame and horror. I must
believe that the National Assembly find themselves in a state of the
greatest humiliation in not being able to punish the authors of this
triumph or the actors in it, and that they are in a situation in which
any inquiry they may make upon the subject must be destitute even of
the appearance of liberty or impartiality. The apology of that
assembly is found in their situation; but when we approve what they
must bear, it is in us the degenerate choice of a vitiated mind.
    With a compelled appearance of deliberation, they vote under the
dominion of a stern necessity. They sit in the heart, as it were, of a
foreign republic: they have their residence in a city whose
constitution has emanated neither from the charter of their king nor
from their legislative power. There they are surrounded by an army not
raised either by the authority of their crown or by their command, and
which, if they should order to dissolve itself, would instantly
dissolve them. There they sit, after a gang of assassins had driven
away some hundreds of the members, whilst those who held the same
moderate principles, with more patience or better hope, continued
every day exposed to outrageous insults and murderous threats. There a
majority, sometimes real, sometimes pretended, captive itself, compels
a captive king to issue as royal edicts, at third hand, the polluted
nonsense of their most licentious and giddy coffeehouses. It is
notorious that all their measures are decided before they are debated.
It is beyond doubt that, under the terror of the bayonet and the
lamp-post and the torch to their houses, they are obliged to adopt all
the crude and desperate measures suggested by clubs composed of a
monstrous medley of all conditions, tongues, and nations. Among
these are found persons, in comparison of whom Catiline would be
thought scrupulous and Cethegus a man of sobriety and moderation.
Nor is it in these clubs alone that the public measures are deformed
into monsters. They undergo a previous distortion in academies,
intended as so many seminaries for these clubs, which are set up in
all the places of public resort. In these meetings of all sorts
every counsel, in proportion as it is daring and violent and
perfidious, is taken for the mark of superior genius. Humanity and
compassion are ridiculed as the fruits of superstition and
ignorance. Tenderness to individuals is considered as treason to the
public. Liberty is always to be estimated perfect, as property is
rendered insecure. Amidst assassination, massacre, and confiscation,
perpetrated or meditated, they are forming plans for the good order of
future society. Embracing in their arms the carcasses of base
criminals and promoting their relations on the title of their
offences, they drive hundreds of virtuous persons to the same end,
by forcing them to subsist by beggary or by crime.
    The Assembly, their organ, acts before them the farce of
deliberation with as little decency as liberty. They act like the
comedians of a fair before a riotous audience; they act amidst the
tumultuous cries of a mixed mob of ferocious men, and of women lost to
shame, who, according to their insolent fancies, direct, control,
applaud, explode them, and sometimes mix and take their seats
amongst them, domineering over them with a strange mixture of
servile petulance and proud, presumptuous authority. As they have
inverted order in all things, the gallery is in the place of the
house. This assembly, which overthrows kings and kingdoms, has not
even the physiognomy and aspect of a grave legislative body- nec color
imperii, nec frons ulla senatus. They have a power given to them, like
that of the evil principle, to subvert and destroy, but none to
construct, except such machines as may be fitted for further
    WHO is it that admires, and from the heart is attached to,
national representative assemblies, but must turn with horror and
disgust from such a profane burlesque, and abominable perversion of
that sacred institute? Lovers of monarchy, lovers of republics must
alike abhor it. The members of your assembly must themselves groan
under the tyranny of which they have all the shame, none of the
direction, and little of the profit. I am sure many of the members who
compose even the majority of that body must feel as I do,
notwithstanding the applauses of the Revolution Society. Miserable
king! miserable assembly! How must that assembly be silently
scandalized with those of their members who could call a day which
seemed to blot the sun out of heaven "un beau jour!"* How must they be
inwardly indignant at hearing others who thought fit to declare to
them "that the vessel of the state would fly forward in her course
toward regeneration with more speed than ever", from the stiff gale of
treason and murder which preceded our preacher's triumph! What must
they have felt whilst, with outward patience and inward indignation,
they heard, of the slaughter of innocent gentlemen in their houses,
that "the blood spilled was not the most pure!" What must they have
felt, when they were besieged by complaints of disorders which shook
their country to its foundations, at being compelled coolly to tell
the complainants that they were under the protection of the law, and
that they would address the king (the captive king) to cause the
laws to be enforced for their protection; when the enslaved
ministers of that captive king had formally notified to them that
there were neither law nor authority nor power left to protect? What
must they have felt at being obliged, as a felicitation on the present
new year, to request their captive king to forget the stormy period of
the last, on account of the great good which he was likely to
produce to his people; to the complete attainment of which good they
adjourned the practical demonstrations of their loyalty, assuring
him of their obedience when he should no longer possess any
    This address was made with much good nature and affection, to be
sure. But among the revolutions in France must be reckoned a
considerable revolution in their ideas of politeness. In England we
are said to learn manners at second-hand from your side of the
water, and that we dress our behavior in the frippery of France. If
so, we are still in the old cut and have not so far conformed to the
new Parisian mode of good breeding as to think it quite in the most
refined strain of delicate compliment (whether in condolence or
congratulation) to say, to the most humiliated creature that crawls
upon the earth, that great public benefits are derived from the murder
of his servants, the attempted assassination of himself and of his
wife, and the mortification, disgrace, and degradation that he has
personally suffered. It is a topic of consolation which our ordinary
of Newgate would be too humane to use to a criminal at the foot of the
gallows. I should have thought that the hangman of Paris, now that
he is liberalized by the vote of the National Assembly and is
allowed his rank and arms in the herald's college of the rights of
men, would be too generous, too gallant a man, too full of the sense
of his new dignity to employ that cutting consolation to any of the
persons whom the lese nation might bring under the administration of
    A man is fallen indeed when he is thus flattered. The anodyne
draught of oblivion, thus drugged, is well calculated to preserve a
galling wakefulness and to feed the living ulcer of a corroding
memory. Thus to administer the opiate potion of amnesty, powdered with
all the ingredients of scorn and contempt, is to hold to his lips,
instead of "the balm of hurt minds", the cup of human misery full to
the brim and to force him to drink it to the dregs.
    Yielding to reasons at least as forcible as those which were so
delicately urged in the compliment on the new year, the king of France
will probably endeavor to forget these events and that compliment. But
history, who keeps a durable record of all our acts and exercises
her awful censure over the proceedings of all sorts of sovereigns,
will not forget either those events or the era of this liberal
refinement in the intercourse of mankind. History will record that
on the morning of the 6th of October, 1789, the king and queen of
France, after a day of confusion, alarm, dismay, and slaughter, lay
down, under the pledged security of public faith, to indulge nature in
a few hours of respite and troubled, melancholy repose. From this
sleep the queen was first startled by the sentinel at her door, who
cried out to her to save herself by flight- that this was the last
proof of fidelity he could give- that they were upon him, and he was
dead. Instantly he was cut down. A band of cruel ruffians and
assassins, reeking with his blood, rushed into the chamber of the
queen and pierced with a hundred strokes of bayonets and poniards
the bed, from whence this persecuted woman had but just time to fly
almost naked, and, through ways unknown to the murderers, had
escaped to seek refuge at the feet of a king and husband not secure of
    This king, to say no more of him, and this queen, and their infant
children (who once would have been the pride and hope of a great and
generous people) were then forced to abandon the sanctuary of the most
splendid palace in the world, which they left swimming in blood,
polluted by massacre and strewed with scattered limbs and mutilated
carcasses. Thence they were conducted into the capital of their
    Two had been selected from the unprovoked, unresisted, promiscuous
slaughter, which was made of the gentlemen of birth and family who
composed the king's body guard. These two gentlemen, with all the
parade of an execution of justice, were cruelly and publicly dragged
to the block and beheaded in the great court of the palace. Their
heads were stuck upon spears and led the procession, whilst the
royal captives who followed in the train were slowly moved along,
amidst the horrid yells, and shrilling screams, and frantic dances,
and infamous contumelies, and all the unutterable abominations of
the furies of hell in the abused shape of the vilest of women. After
they had been made to taste, drop by drop, more than the bitterness of
death in the slow torture of a journey of twelve miles, protracted
to six hours, they were, under a guard composed of those very soldiers
who had thus conducted them through this famous triumph, lodged in one
of the old palaces of Paris, now converted into a bastille for kings.
    Is this a triumph to be consecrated at altars? to be
commemorated with grateful thanksgiving? to be offered to the divine
humanity with fervent prayer and enthusiastic ejaculation?- These
Theban and Thracian orgies, acted in France and applauded only in
the Old Jewry, I assure you, kindle prophetic enthusiasm in the
minds but of very few people in this kingdom, although a saint and
apostle, who may have revelations of his own and who has so completely
vanquished all the mean superstitions of the heart, may incline to
think it pious and decorous to compare it with the entrance into the
world of the Prince of Peace, proclaimed in a holy temple by a
venerable sage, and not long before not worse announced by the voice
    At first I was at a loss to account for this fit of unguarded
transport. I knew, indeed, that the sufferings of monarchs make a
delicious repast to some sort of palates. There were reflections which
might serve to keep this appetite within some bounds of temperance.
But when I took one circumstance into my consideration, I was
obliged to confess that much allowance ought to be made for the
Society, and that the temptation was too strong for common discretion-
I mean, the circumstance of the Io Paean of the triumph, the animating
cry which called "for all the BISHOPS to be hanged on the lampposts",*
might well have brought forth a burst of enthusiasm on the foreseen
consequences of this happy day. I allow to so much enthusiasm some
little deviation from prudence. I allow this prophet to break forth
into hymns of joy and thanksgiving on an event which appears like
the precursor of the Millennium and the projected fifth monarchy in
    There was, however, (as in all human affairs there is) in the
midst of this joy something to exercise the patience of these worthy
gentlemen and to try the long-suffering of their faith. The actual
murder of the king and queen, and their child, was wanting to the
other auspicious circumstances of this "beautiful day". The actual
murder of the bishops, though called for by so many holy ejaculations,
was also wanting. A group of regicide and sacrilegious slaughter was
indeed boldly sketched, but it was only sketched. It unhappily was
left unfinished in this great history-piece of the massacre of
innocents. What hardy pencil of a great master from the school of
the rights of man will finish it is to be seen hereafter. The age
has not yet the complete benefit of that diffusion of knowledge that
has undermined superstition and error; and the king of France wants
another object or two to consign to oblivion, in consideration of
all the good which is to arise from his own sufferings and the
    * It is proper here to refer to a letter written upon this subject
by an eye witness. That eye witness was one of the most honest,
intelligent, and eloquent members of the National Assembly, one of the
most active and zealous reformers of the state. He was obliged to
secede from the Assembly; and he afterwards became a voluntary
exile, on account of the horrors of this pious triumph and the
dispositions of men who, profiting of crimes, if not causing them,
    EXTRACT of M. de Lally Tollendal's Second Letter to a Friend.
    "Parlons du parti que j'ai pris; il est bien justifie dans ma
conscience.- Ni cette ville coupable, ni cette assemblee plus coupable
encore, ne meritoient que je me justifie; mais j'ai a coeur que
vous, et les personnes qui pensent comme vous, ne me condamnent
pas.- Ma sante, je vous jure, me rendoit mes fonctions impossibles;
mais meme en les mettant de cote il a ete au-dessus de mes forces de
supporter plus long-tems l'horreur que me causoit ce sang,- ces tetes-
cette reine presque egorgee,- ce roi,- amene esclave,- entrant a
Paris, au milieu de ses assassins, et precede des tetes de ses
malheureux gardes.- Ces perfides jannissaires, ces assassins, ces
femmes cannibales, ce cri de, TOUS LES EVEQUES A LA LANTERNE, dans
le moment ou le roi entre sa capitale avec deux eveques de son conseil
dans sa voiture. Un coup de fusil, que j'ai vu tirer dans un des
carosses de la reine. M. Bailly appellant cela un beau jour.
L'assemblee ayant declare froidement le matin, qu'il n'etoit pas de sa
dignite d'aller toute entiere environner le roi. M. Mirabeau disant
impunement dans cette assemblee, que le vaisseau de l'etat, loin
d'etre arrete dans sa course, s'elanceroit avec plus de rapidite que
jamais vers sa regeneration. M. Barnave, riant avec lui, quand des
flots de sang couloient autour de nous. Le vertueux Mounier(*)
echappant par miracle a vingt assassins, qui avoient voulu faire de sa
    "Voila ce qui me fit jurer de ne plus mettre le pied dans cette
caverne d'Antropophages ou je n'avois plus de force d'elever la
voix, ou depuis six semaines je l'avois elevee en vain. Moi,
Mounier, et tous les honnetes gens, ont le dernier effort a faire pour
le bien etoit (sic) d'en sortir. Aucune idee de crainte ne s'est
approchee de moi. Je rougirois de m'en defendre. J'avois encore recu
sur la route de la part de ce peuple, moins coupable que ceux qui
l'ont enivre de fureur, des acclamations, et des applaudissements,
dont d'autres auroient ete flattes, et qui m'ont fait fremir. C'est
a l'indignation, c'est a l'horreur, c'est aux convulsions physiques,
que se seul aspect du sang me fait eprouver que j'ai cede. On brave
une seule mort; on la brave plusieurs fois, quand elle peut etre
utile. Mais aucune puissance sous le Ciel, mais aucune opinion
publique ou privee n'ont le droit de me condamner a souffrir
inutilement mille supplices par minute, et a perir de desespoir, de
rage, au milieu des triomphes, du crime que je n'ai pu arreter. Ils me
proscriront, ils confisqueront mes biens. Je labourerai la terre, et
je ne les verrai plus.- Voila ma justification. Vous pouvez la lire,
la montrer, la laisser copier; tant pis pour ceux qui ne la
comprendront pas; ce ne sera alors moi qui auroit eu tort de la leur
    This military man had not so good nerves as the peaceable
gentleman of the Old Jewry.- See Mons. Mounier's narrative of these
transactions; a man also of honour and virtue, and talents, and
    (*) N.B. Mr. Mounier was then speaker of the National Assembly. He
has since been obliged to live in exile, though one of the firmest
    Although this work of our new light and knowledge did not go to
the length that in all probability it was intended it should be
carried, yet I must think that such treatment of any human creatures
must be shocking to any but those who are made for accomplishing
revolutions. But I cannot stop here. Influenced by the inborn feelings
of my nature, and not being illuminated by a single ray of this
new-sprung modern light, I confess to you, Sir, that the exalted
rank of the persons suffering, and particularly the sex, the beauty,
and the amiable qualities of the descendant of so many kings and
emperors, with the tender age of royal infants, insensible only
through infancy and innocence of the cruel outrages to which their
parents were exposed, instead of being a subject of exultation, adds
not a little to any sensibility on that most melancholy occasion.
    I hear that the august person who was the principal object of
our preacher's triumph, though he supported himself, felt much on that
shameful occasion. As a man, it became him to feel for his wife and
his children, and the faithful guards of his person that were
massacred in cold blood about him; as a prince, it became him to
feel for the strange and frightful transformation of his civilized
subjects, and to be more grieved for them than solicitous for himself.
It derogates little from his fortitude, while it adds infinitely to
the honor of his humanity. I am very sorry to say it, very sorry
indeed, that such personages are in a situation in which it is not
unbecoming in us to praise the virtues of the great.
    I hear, and I rejoice to hear, that the great lady, the other
object of the triumph, has borne that day (one is interested that
beings made for suffering should suffer well), and that she bears
all the succeeding days, that she bears the imprisonment of her
husband, and her own captivity, and the exile of her friends, and
the insulting adulation of addresses, and the whole weight of her
accumulated wrongs, with a serene patience, in a manner suited to
her rank and race, and becoming the offspring of a sovereign
distinguished for her piety and her courage; that, like her, she has
lofty sentiments; that she feels with the dignity of a Roman matron;
that in the last extremity she will save herself from the last
disgrace; and that, if she must fall, she will fall by no ignoble
    It is now sixteen or seventeen years since I saw the queen of
France, then the dauphiness, at Versailles, and surely never lighted
on this orb, which she hardly seemed to touch, a more delightful
vision. I saw her just above the horizon, decorating and cheering
the elevated sphere she just began to move in- glittering like the
morning star, full of life and splendor and joy. Oh! what a
revolution! and what a heart must I have to contemplate without
emotion that elevation and that fall! Little did I dream when she
added titles of veneration to those of enthusiastic, distant,
respectful love, that she should ever be obliged to carry the sharp
antidote against disgrace concealed in that bosom; little did I
dream that I should have lived to see such disasters fallen upon her
in a nation of gallant men, in a nation of men of honor and of
cavaliers. I thought ten thousand swords must have leaped from their
scabbards to avenge even a look that threatened her with insult. But
the age of chivalry is gone. That of sophisters, economists; and
calculators has succeeded; and the glory of Europe is extinguished
forever. Never, never more shall we behold that generous loyalty to
rank and sex, that proud submission, that dignified obedience, that
subordination of the heart which kept alive, even in servitude itself,
the spirit of an exalted freedom. The unbought grace of life, the
cheap defense of nations, the nurse of manly sentiment and heroic
enterprise, is gone! It is gone, that sensibility of principle, that
chastity of honor which felt a stain like a wound, which inspired
courage whilst it mitigated ferocity, which ennobled whatever it
touched, and under which vice itself lost half its evil by losing
    THIS mixed system of opinion and sentiment had its origin in the
ancient chivalry; and the principle, though varied in its appearance
by the varying state of human affairs, subsisted and influenced
through a long succession of generations even to the time we live
in. If it should ever be totally extinguished, the loss I fear will be
great. It is this which has given its character to modern Europe. It
is this which has distinguished it under all its forms of
government, and distinguished it to its advantage, from the states
of Asia and possibly from those states which flourished in the most
brilliant periods of the antique world. It was this which, without
confounding ranks, had produced a noble equality and handed it down
through all the gradations of social life. It was this opinion which
mitigated kings into companions and raised private men to be fellows
with kings. Without force or opposition, it subdued the fierceness
of pride and power, it obliged sovereigns to submit to the soft collar
of social esteem, compelled stern authority to submit to elegance, and
gave a domination, vanquisher of laws, to be subdued by manners.
    But now all is to be changed. All the pleasing illusions which
made power gentle and obedience liberal, which harmonized the
different shades of life, and which, by a bland assimilation,
incorporated into politics the sentiments which beautify and soften
private society, are to be dissolved by this new conquering empire
of light and reason. All the decent drapery of life is to be rudely
torn off. All the super-added ideas, furnished from the wardrobe of
a moral imagination, which the heart owns and the understanding
ratifies as necessary to cover the defects of our naked, shivering
nature, and to raise it to dignity in our own estimation, are to be
exploded as a ridiculous, absurd, and antiquated fashion.
    On this scheme of things, a king is but a man, a queen is but a
woman; a woman is but an animal, and an animal not of the highest
order. All homage paid to the sex in general as such, and without
distinct views, is to be regarded as romance and folly. Regicide,
and parricide, and sacrilege are but fictions of superstition,
corrupting jurisprudence by destroying its simplicity. The murder of a
king, or a queen, or a bishop, or a father are only common homicide;
and if the people are by any chance or in any way gainers by it, a
sort of homicide much the most pardonable, and into which we ought not
    On the scheme of this barbarous philosophy, which is the offspring
of cold hearts and muddy understandings, and which is as void of solid
wisdom as it is destitute of all taste and elegance, laws are to be
supported only by their own terrors and by the concern which each
individual may find in them from his own private speculations or can
spare to them from his own private interests. In the groves of their
academy, at the end of every vista, you see nothing but the gallows.
Nothing is left which engages the affections on the part of the
commonwealth. On the principles of this mechanic philosophy, our
institutions can never be embodied, if I may use the expression, in
persons, so as to create in us love, veneration, admiration, or
attachment. But that sort of reason which banishes the affections is
incapable of filling their place. These public affections, combined
with manners, are required sometimes as supplements, sometimes as
correctives, always as aids to law. The precept given by a wise man,
as well as a great critic, for the construction of poems is equally
true as to states:- Non satis est pulchra esse poemata, dulcia
sunto. There ought to be a system of manners in every nation which a
well-informed mind would be disposed to relish. To make us love our
    But power, of some kind or other, will survive the shock in
which manners and opinions perish; and it will find other and worse
means for its support. The usurpation which, in order to subvert
ancient institutions, has destroyed ancient principles will hold power
by arts similar to those by which it has acquired it. When the old
feudal and chivalrous spirit of fealty, which, by freeing kings from
fear, freed both kings and subjects from the precautions of tyranny,
shall be extinct in the minds of men, plots and assassinations will be
anticipated by preventive murder and preventive confiscation, and that
long roll of grim and bloody maxims which form the political code of
all power not standing on its own honor and the honor of those who are
to obey it. Kings will be tyrants from policy when subjects are rebels
    When ancient opinions and rules of life are taken away, the loss
cannot possibly be estimated. From that moment we have no compass to
govern us; nor can we know distinctly to what port we steer. Europe,
undoubtedly, taken in a mass, was in a flourishing condition the day
on which your revolution was completed. How much of that prosperous
state was owing to the spirit of our old manners and opinions is not
easy to say; but as such causes cannot be indifferent in their
operation, we must presume that on the whole their operation was
    We are but too apt to consider things in the state in which we
find them, without sufficiently adverting to the causes by which
they have been produced and possibly may be upheld. Nothing is more
certain than that our manners, our civilization, and all the good
things which are connected with manners and with civilization have, in
this European world of ours, depended for ages upon two principles and
were, indeed, the result of both combined: I mean the spirit of a
gentleman and the spirit of religion. The nobility and the clergy, the
one by profession, the other by patronage, kept learning in existence,
even in the midst of arms and confusions, and whilst governments
were rather in their causes than formed. Learning paid back what it
received to nobility and to priesthood, and paid it with usury, by
enlarging their ideas and by furnishing their minds. Happy if they had
all continued to know their indissoluble union and their proper place!
Happy if learning, not debauched by ambition, had been satisfied to
continue the instructor, and not aspired to be the master! Along
with its natural protectors and guardians, learning will be cast
into the mire and trodden down under the hoofs of a swinish*
    * See the fate of Bailly and Condorcet, supposed to be here
particularly alluded to. Compare the circumstances of the trial and
    If, as I suspect, modern letters owe more than they are always
willing to own to ancient manners, so do other interests which we
value full as much as they are worth. Even commerce and trade and
manufacture, the gods of our economical politicians, are themselves
perhaps but creatures, are themselves but effects which, as first
causes, we choose to worship. They certainly grew under the same shade
in which learning flourished. They, too, may decay with their
natural protecting principles. With you, for the present at least,
they all threaten to disappear together. Where trade and
manufactures are wanting to a people, and the spirit of nobility and
religion remains, sentiment supplies, and not always ill supplies,
their place; but if commerce and the arts should be lost in an
experiment to try how well a state may stand without these old
fundamental principles, what sort of a thing must be a nation of
gross, stupid, ferocious, and, at the same time, poor and sordid
barbarians, destitute of religion, honor, or manly pride, possessing
nothing at present, and hoping for nothing hereafter?
    I wish you may not be going fast, and by the shortest cut, to that
horrible and disgustful situation. Already there appears a poverty
of conception, a coarseness, and a vulgarity in all the proceedings of
the Assembly and of all their instructors. Their liberty is not
liberal. Their science is presumptuous ignorance. Their humanity is
    It is not clear whether in England we learned those grand and
decorous principles and manners, of which considerable traces yet
remain, from you or whether you took them from us. But to you, I
think, we trace them best. You seem to me to be gentis incunabula
nostrae. France has always more or less influenced manners in England;
and when your fountain is choked up and polluted, the stream will
not run long, or not run clear, with us or perhaps with any nation.
This gives all Europe, in my opinion, but too close and connected a
concern in what is done in France. Excuse me, therefore, if I have
dwelt too long on the atrocious spectacle of the 6th of October, 1789,
or have given too much scope to the reflections which have arisen in
my mind on occasion of the most important of all revolutions, which
may be dated from that day- I mean a revolution in sentiments,
manners, and moral opinions. As things now stand, with everything
respectable destroyed without us, and an attempt to destroy within
us every principle of respect, one is almost forced to apologize for
    WHY do I feel so differently from the Reverend Dr. Price and those
of his lay flock who will choose to adopt the sentiments of his
discourse?- For this plain reason: because it is natural I should;
because we are so made as to be affected at such spectacles with
melancholy sentiments upon the unstable condition of mortal prosperity
and the tremendous uncertainty of human greatness; because in those
natural feelings we learn great lessons; because in events like
these our passions instruct our reason; because when kings are
hurled from their thrones by the Supreme Director of this great
drama and become the objects of insult to the base and of pity to
the good, we behold such disasters in the moral as we should behold
a miracle in the physical order of things. We are alarmed into
reflection; our minds (as it has long since been observed) are
purified by terror and pity, our weak, unthinking pride is humbled
under the dispensations of a mysterious wisdom. Some tears might be
drawn from me if such a spectacle were exhibited on the stage. I
should be truly ashamed of finding in myself that superficial,
theatric sense of painted distress whilst I could exult over it in
real life. With such a perverted mind I could never venture to show my
face at a tragedy. People would think the tears that Garrick formerly,
or that Siddons not long since, have extorted from me were the tears
of hypocrisy; I should know them to be the tears of folly.
    Indeed, the theatre is a better school of moral sentiments than
churches, where the feelings of humanity are thus outraged. Poets
who have to deal with an audience not yet graduated in the school of
the rights of men and who must apply themselves to the moral
constitution of the heart would not dare to produce such a triumph
as a matter of exultation. There, where men follow their natural
impulses, they would not bear the odious maxims of a Machiavellian
policy, whether applied to the attainments of monarchical or
democratic tyranny. They would reject them on the modern as they
once did on the ancient stage, where they could not bear even the
hypothetical proposition of such wickedness in the mouth of a
personated tyrant, though suitable to the character he sustained. No
theatric audience in Athens would bear what has been borne in the
midst of the real tragedy of this triumphal day: a principal actor
weighing, as it were, in scales hung in a shop of horrors, so much
actual crime against so much contingent advantage; and after putting
in and out weights, declaring that the balance was on the side of
the advantages. They would not bear to see the crimes of new democracy
posted as in a ledger against the crimes of old despotism, and the
book-keepers of politics finding democracy still in debt, but by no
means unable or unwilling to pay the balance. In the theater, the
first intuitive glance, without any elaborate process of reasoning,
will show that this method of political computation would justify
every extent of crime. They would see that on these principles, even
where the very worst acts were not perpetrated, it was owing rather to
the fortune of the conspirators than to their parsimony in the
expenditure of treachery and blood. They would soon see that
criminal means once tolerated are soon preferred. They present a
shorter cut to the object than through the highway of the moral
virtues. Justifying perfidy and murder for public benefit, public
benefit would soon become the pretext, and perfidy and murder the end,
until rapacity, malice, revenge, and fear more dreadful than revenge
could satiate their insatiable appetites. Such must be the
consequences of losing, in the splendor of these triumphs of the
rights of men, all natural sense of wrong and right.
    But the reverend pastor exults in this "leading in triumph",
because truly Louis the Sixteenth was "an arbitrary monarch"; that is,
in other words, neither more nor less than because he was Louis the
Sixteenth, and because he had the misfortune to be born king of
France, with the prerogatives of which a long line of ancestors and
a long acquiescence of the people, without any act of his, had put him
in possession. A misfortune it has indeed turned out to him that he
was born king of France. But misfortune is not crime, nor is
indiscretion always the greatest guilt. I shall never think that a
prince the acts of whose whole reign was a series of concessions to
his subjects, who was willing to relax his authority, to remit his
prerogatives, to call his people to a share of freedom not known,
perhaps not desired, by their ancestors- such a prince, though he
should be subjected to the common frailties attached to men and to
princes, though he should have once thought it necessary to provide
force against the desperate designs manifestly carrying on against his
person and the remnants of his authority- though all this should be
taken into consideration, I shall be led with great difficulty to
think he deserves the cruel and insulting triumph of Paris and of
Dr. Price. I tremble for the cause of liberty from such an example
to kings. I tremble for the cause of humanity in the unpunished
outrages of the most wicked of mankind. But there are some people of
that low and degenerate fashion of mind, that they look up with a sort
of complacent awe and admiration to kings who know to keep firm in
their seat, to hold a strict hand over their subjects, to assert their
prerogative, and, by the awakened vigilance of a severe despotism,
to guard against the very first approaches to freedom. Against such as
these they never elevate their voice. Deserters from principle, listed
with fortune, they never see any good in suffering virtue, nor any
    If it could have been made clear to me that the king and queen
of France (those I mean who were such before the triumph) were
inexorable and cruel tyrants, that they had formed a deliberate scheme
for massacring the National Assembly (I think I have seen something
like the latter insinuated in certain publications), I should think
their captivity just. If this be true, much more ought to have been
done, but done, in my opinion, in another manner. The punishment of
real tyrants is a noble and awful act of justice; and it has with
truth been said to be consolatory to the human mind. But if I were
to punish a wicked king, I should regard the dignity in avenging the
crime. Justice is grave and decorous, and in its punishments rather
seems to submit to a necessity than to make a choice. Had Nero, or
Agrippina, or Louis the Eleventh, or Charles the Ninth been the
subject; if Charles the Twelfth of Sweden, after the murder of Patkul,
or his predecessor Christina, after the murder of Monaldeschi, had
fallen into your hands, Sir, or into mine, I am sure our conduct would
    If the French king, or king of the French (or by whatever name
he is known in the new vocabulary of your constitution), has in his
own person and that of his queen really deserved these unavowed, but
unavenged, murderous attempts and those frequent indignities more
cruel than murder, such a person would ill deserve even that
subordinate executory trust which I understand is to be placed in him,
nor is he fit to be called chief in a nation which he has outraged and
oppressed. A worse choice for such an office in a new commonwealth
than that of a deposed tyrant could not possibly be made. But to
degrade and insult a man as the worst of criminals and afterwards to
trust him in your highest concerns as a faithful, honest, and
zealous servant is not consistent to reasoning, nor prudent in policy,
nor safe in practice. Those who could make such an appointment must be
guilty of a more flagrant breach of trust than any they have yet
committed against the people. As this is the only crime in which
your leading politicians could have acted inconsistently, I conclude
that there is no sort of ground for these horrid insinuations. I think
    IN ENGLAND, we give no credit to them. We are generous enemies; we
are faithful allies. We spurn from us with disgust and indignation the
slanders of those who bring us their anecdotes with the attestation of
the flower-de-luce on their shoulder. We have Lord George Gordon
fast in Newgate; and neither his being a public proselyte to
Judaism, nor his having, in his zeal against Catholic priests and
all sorts of ecclesiastics, raised a mob (excuse the term, it is still
in use here) which pulled down all our prisons, have preserved to
him a liberty of which he did not render himself worthy by a
virtuous use of it. We have rebuilt Newgate and tenanted the
mansion. We have prisons almost as strong as the Bastille for those
who dare to libel the queens of France. In this spiritual retreat, let
the noble libeller remain. Let him there meditate on his Talmud
until he learns a conduct more becoming his birth and parts, and not
so disgraceful to the ancient religion to which he has become a
proselyte; or until some persons from your side of the water, to
please your new Hebrew brethren, shall ransom him. He may then be
enabled to purchase with the old boards of the synagogue and a very
small poundage on the long compound interest of the thirty pieces of
silver (Dr. Price has shown us what miracles compound interest will
perform in 1790 years,), the lands which are lately discovered to have
been usurped by the Gallican church. Send us your Popish archbishop of
Paris, and we will send you our Protestant Rabbin. We shall treat
the person you send us in exchange like a gentleman and an honest man,
as he is; but pray let him bring with him the fund of his hospitality,
bounty, and charity, and, depend upon it, we shall never confiscate
a shilling of that honorable and pious fund, nor think of enriching
    To tell you the truth, my dear Sir, I think the honor of our
nation to be somewhat concerned in the disclaimer of the proceedings
of this society of the Old Jewry and the London Tavern. I have no
man's proxy. I speak only for myself when I disclaim, as I do with all
possible earnestness, all communion with the actors in that triumph or
with the admirers of it. When I assert anything else as concerning the
people of England, I speak from observation, not from authority, but I
speak from the experience I have had in a pretty extensive and mixed
communication with the inhabitants of this kingdom, of all
descriptions and ranks, and after a course of attentive observations
begun early in life and continued for nearly forty years. I have often
been astonished, considering that we are divided from you but by a
slender dyke of about twenty-four miles, and that the mutual
intercourse between the two countries has lately been very great, to
find how little you seem to know of us. I suspect that this is owing
to your forming a judgment of this nation from certain publications
which do very erroneously, if they do at all, represent the opinions
and dispositions generally prevalent in England. The vanity,
restlessness, petulance, and spirit of intrigue, of several petty
cabals, who attempt to hide their total want of consequence in
bustle and noise, and puffing, and mutual quotation of each other,
makes you imagine that our contemptuous neglect of their abilities
is a mark of general acquiescence in their opinions. No such thing,
I assure you. Because half a dozen grasshoppers under a fern make
the field ring with their importunate chink, whilst thousands of great
cattle, reposed beneath the shadow of the British oak, chew the cud
and are silent, pray do not imagine that those who make the noise
are the only inhabitants of the field; that, of course, they are
many in number, or that, after all, they are other than the little,
shrivelled, meager, hopping, though loud and troublesome, insects of
    I almost venture to affirm that not one in a hundred amongst us
participates in the "triumph" of the Revolution Society. If the king
and queen of France, and their children, were to fall into our hands
by the chance of war, in the most acrimonious of all hostilities (I
deprecate such an event, I deprecate such hostility), they would be
treated with another sort of triumphal entry into London. We
formerly have had a king of France in that situation; you have read
how he was treated by the victor in the field, and in what manner he
was afterwards received in England. Four hundred years have gone
over us, but I believe we are not materially changed since that
period. Thanks to our sullen resistance to innovation, thanks to the
cold sluggishness of our national character, we still bear the stamp
of our forefathers. We have not (as I conceive) lost the generosity
and dignity of thinking of the fourteenth century, nor as yet have
we subtilized ourselves into savages. We are not the converts of
Rousseau; we are not the disciples of Voltaire; Helvetius has made
no progress amongst us. Atheists are not our preachers; madmen are not
our lawgivers. We know that we have made no discoveries, and we
think that no discoveries are to be made in morality, nor many in
the great principles of government, nor in the ideas of liberty, which
were understood long before we were born, altogether as well as they
will be after the grace has heaped its mold upon our presumption and
the silent tomb shall have imposed its law on our pert loquacity. In
England we have not yet been completely embowelled of our natural
entrails; we still feel within us, and we cherish and cultivate, those
inbred sentiments which are the faithful guardians, the active
monitors of our duty, the true supporters of all liberal and manly
morals. We have not been drawn and trussed, in order that we may be
filled, like stuffed birds in a museum, with chaff and rags and paltry
blurred shreds of paper about the rights of men. We preserve the whole
of our feelings still native and entire, unsophisticated by pedantry
and infidelity. We have real hearts of flesh and blood beating in
our bosoms. We fear God; we look up with awe to kings, with
affection to parliaments, with duty to magistrates, with reverence
to priests, and with respect to nobility.* Why? Because when such
ideas are brought before our minds, it is natural to be so affected;
because all other feelings are false and spurious and tend to
corrupt our minds, to vitiate our primary morals, to render us unfit
for rational liberty, and, by teaching us a servile, licentious, and
abandoned insolence, to be our low sport for a few holidays, to make
us perfectly fit for, and justly deserving of, slavery through the
    * The English are, I conceive, misrepresented in a letter
published in one of the papers, by a gentleman thought to be a
dissenting minister.- When writing to Dr. Price of the spirit which
prevails at Paris, he says: "The spirit of the people in this place
has abolished all the proud distinctions which the king and nobles had
usurped in their minds; whether they talk of the king, the noble, or
the priest, their whole language is that of the most enlightened and
liberal amongst the English". If this gentleman means to confine the
terms "enlightened" and "liberal" to one set of men in England, it may
    YOU see, Sir, that in this enlightened age I am bold enough to
confess that we are generally men of untaught feelings, that,
instead of casting away all our old prejudices, we cherish them to a
very considerable degree, and, to take more shame to ourselves, we
cherish them because they are prejudices; and the longer they have
lasted and the more generally they have prevailed, the more we cherish
them. We are afraid to put men to live and trade each on his own
private stock of reason, because we suspect that this stock in each
man is small, and that the individuals would do better to avail
themselves of the general bank and capital of nations and of ages.
Many of our men of speculation, instead of exploding general
prejudices, employ their sagacity to discover the latent wisdom
which prevails in them. If they find what they seek, and they seldom
fail, they think it more wise to continue the prejudice, with the
reason involved, than to cast away the coat of prejudice and to
leave nothing but the naked reason; because prejudice, with its
reason, has a motive to give action to that reason, and an affection
which will give it permanence. Prejudice is of ready application in
the emergency; it previously engages the mind in a steady course of
wisdom and virtue and does not leave the man hesitating in the
moment of decision skeptical, puzzled, and unresolved. Prejudice
renders a man's virtue his habit, and not a series of unconnected
acts. Through just prejudice, his duty becomes a part of his nature.
    Your literary men and your politicians, and so do the whole clan
of the enlightened among us, essentially differ in these points.
They have no respect for the wisdom of others, but they pay it off
by a very full measure of confidence in their own. With them it is a
sufficient motive to destroy an old scheme of things because it is
an old one. As to the new, they are in no sort of fear with regard
to the duration of a building run up in haste, because duration is
no object to those who think little or nothing has been done before
their time, and who place all their hopes in discovery. They conceive,
very systematically, that all things which give perpetuity are
mischievous, and therefore they are at inexpiable war with all
establishments. They think that government may vary like modes of
dress, and with as little ill effect; that there needs no principle of
attachment, except a sense of present convenience, to any constitution
of the state. They always speak as if they were of opinion that
there is a singular species of compact between them and their
magistrates which binds the magistrate, but which has nothing
reciprocal in it, but that the majesty of the people has a right to
dissolve it without any reason but its will. Their attachment to their
country itself is only so far as it agrees with some of their fleeting
projects; it begins and ends with that scheme of polity which falls in
    These doctrines, or rather sentiments, seem prevalent with your
new statesmen. But they are wholly different from those on which we
    I hear it is sometimes given out in France that what is doing
among you is after the example of England. I beg leave to affirm
that scarcely anything done with you has originated from the
practice or the prevalent opinions of this people, either in the act
or in the spirit of the proceeding. Let me add that we are as
unwilling to learn these lessons from France as we are sure that we
never taught them to that nation. The cabals here who take a sort of
share of your transactions as yet consist of but a handful of
people. If, unfortunately, by their intrigues, their sermons, their
publications, and by a confidence derived from an expected union
with the counsels and forces of the French nation, they should draw
considerable numbers into their faction, and in consequence should
seriously attempt anything here in imitation of what has been done
with you, the event, I dare venture to prophesy, will be that, with
some trouble to their country, they will soon accomplish their own
destruction. This people refused to change their law in remote ages
from respect to the infallibility of popes, and they will not now
alter it from a pious implicit faith in the dogmatism of philosophers,
though the former was armed with the anathema and crusade, and
though the latter should act with the libel and the lamp-iron.
    Formerly, your affairs were your own concern only. We felt for
them as men, but we kept aloof from them because we were not
citizens of France. But when we see the model held up to ourselves, we
must feel as Englishmen, and feeling, we must provide as Englishmen.
Your affairs, in spite of us, are made a part of our interest, so
far at least as to keep at a distance your panacea, or your plague. If
it be a panacea, we do not want it. We know the consequences of
unnecessary physic. If it be a plague, it is such a plague that the
precautions of the most severe quarantine ought to be established
    I hear on all hands that a cabal calling itself philosophic
receives the glory of many of the late proceedings, and that their
opinions and systems are the true actuating spirit of the whole of
them. I have heard of no party in England, literary or political, at
any time, known by such a description. It is not with you composed
of those men, is it, whom the vulgar in their blunt, homely style
commonly call atheists and infidels? If it be, I admit that we, too,
have had writers of that description who made some noise in their day.
At present they repose in lasting oblivion. Who, born within the
last forty years, has read one word of Collins, and Toland, and
Tindal, and Chubb, and Morgan, and that whole race who called
themselves Freethinkers? Who now reads Bolingbroke? Who ever read
him through? Ask the booksellers of London what is become of all these
lights of the world. In as few years their few successors will go to
the family vault of "all the Capulets". But whatever they were, or
are, with us, they were and are wholly unconnected individuals. With
us they kept the common nature of their kind and were not
gregarious. They never acted in corps or were known as a faction in
the state, nor presumed to influence in that name or character, or for
the purposes of such a faction, on any of our public concerns. Whether
they ought so to exist and so be permitted to act is another question.
As such cabals have not existed in England, so neither has the
spirit of them had any influence in establishing the original frame of
our constitution or in any one of the several reparations and
improvements it has undergone. The whole has been done under the
auspices, and is confirmed by the sanctions, of religion and piety.
The whole has emanated from the simplicity of our national character
and from a sort of native plainness and directness of understanding,
which for a long time characterized those men who have successively
obtained authority amongst us. This disposition still remains, at
    WE KNOW, AND WHAT IS BETTER, we feel inwardly, that religion is
the basis of civil society and the source of all good and of all
comfort.* In England we are so convinced of this, that there is no
rust of superstition with which the accumulated absurdity of the human
mind might have crusted it over in the course of ages, that
ninety-nine in a hundred of the people of England would not prefer
to impiety. We shall never be such fools as to call in an enemy to the
substance of any system to remove its corruptions, to supply its
defects, or to perfect its construction. If our religious tenets
should ever want a further elucidation, we shall not call on atheism
to explain them. We shall not light up our temple from that unhallowed
fire. It will be illuminated with other lights. It will be perfumed
with other incense than the infectious stuff which is imported by
the smugglers of adulterated metaphysics. If our ecclesiastical
establishment should want a revision, it is not avarice or rapacity,
public or private, that we shall employ for the audit, or receipt,
or application of its consecrated revenue. Violently condemning
neither the Greek nor the Armenian, nor, since heats are subsided, the
Roman system of religion, we prefer the Protestant, not because we
think it has less of the Christian religion in it, but because, in our
judgment, it has more. We are Protestants, not from indifference,
    * Sit igitur hoc ab initio persuasum civibus, dominos esse
omnium rerum ac moderatores, deos; eaque, quae gerantur, eorum geri
vi, ditione, ac numine; eosdemque optime de genere hominum mereri;
et qualis quisque sit, quid agat, quid in se admittat, qua mente,
qua pietate colat religiones intueri; piorum et impiorum habere
rationem. His enim rebus imbutae mentes haud sane abhorrebunt ab utili
    We know, and it is our pride to know, that man is by his
constitution a religious animal; that atheism is against, not only our
reason, but our instincts; and that it cannot prevail long. But if, in
the moment of riot and in a drunken delirium from the hot spirit drawn
out of the alembic of hell, which in France is now so furiously
boiling, we should uncover our nakedness by throwing off that
Christian religion which has hitherto been our boast and comfort,
and one great source of civilization amongst us and amongst many other
nations, we are apprehensive (being well aware that the mind will
not endure a void) that some uncouth, pernicious, and degrading
    For that reason, before we take from our establishment the
natural, human means of estimation and give it up to contempt, as
you have done, and in doing it have incurred the penalties you well
deserve to suffer, we desire that some other may be presented to us in
    On these ideas, instead of quarrelling with establishments, as
some do who have made a philosophy and a religion of their hostility
to such institutions, we cleave closely to them. We are resolved to
keep an established church, an established monarchy, an established
aristocracy, and an established democracy, each in the degree it
exists, and in no greater. I shall show you presently how much of each
    It has been the misfortune (not, as these gentlemen think it,
the glory) of this age that everything is to be discussed as if the
constitution of our country were to be always a subject rather of
altercation than enjoyment. For this reason, as well as for the
satisfaction of those among you (if any such you have among you) who
may wish to profit of examples, I venture to trouble you with a few
thoughts upon each of these establishments. I do not think they were
unwise in ancient Rome who, when they wished to new-model their
laws, set commissioners to examine the best constituted republics
    First, I beg leave to speak of our church establishment, which
is the first of our prejudices, not a prejudice destitute of reason,
but involving in it profound and extensive wisdom. I speak of it
first. It is first and last and midst in our minds. For, taking ground
on that religious system of which we are now in possession, we
continue to act on the early received and uniformly continued sense of
mankind. That sense not only, like a wise architect, hath built up the
august fabric of states, but, like a provident proprietor, to preserve
the structure from profanation and ruin, as a sacred temple purged
from all the impurities of fraud and violence and injustice and
tyranny, hath solemnly and forever consecrated the commonwealth and
all that officiate in it. This consecration is made that all who
administer the government of men, in which they stand in the person of
God himself, should have high and worthy notions of their function and
destination, that their hope should be full of immortality, that
they should not look to the paltry pelf of the moment nor to the
temporary and transient praise of the vulgar, but to a solid,
permanent existence in the permanent part of their nature, and to a
permanent fame and glory in the example they leave as a rich
    Such sublime principles ought to be infused into persons of
exalted situations, and religious establishments provided that may
continually revive and enforce them. Every sort of moral, every sort
of civil, every sort of politic institution, aiding the rational and
natural ties that connect the human understanding and affections to
the divine, are not more than necessary in order to build up that
wonderful structure Man, whose prerogative it is to be in a great
degree a creature of his own making, and who, when made as he ought to
be made, is destined to hold no trivial place in the creation. But
whenever man is put over men, as the better nature ought ever to
preside, in that case more particularly, he should as nearly as
    The consecration of the state by a state religious establishment
is necessary, also, to operate with a wholesome awe upon free
citizens, because, in order to secure their freedom, they must enjoy
some determinate portion of power. To them, therefore, a religion
connected with the state, and with their duty toward it, becomes
even more necessary than in such societies where the people, by the
terms of their subjection, are confined to private sentiments and
the management of their own family concerns. All persons possessing
any portion of power ought to be strongly and awfully impressed with
an idea that they act in trust, and that they are to account for their
conduct in that trust to the one great Master, Author, and Founder
    This principle ought even to be more strongly impressed upon the
minds of those who compose the collective sovereignty than upon
those of single princes. Without instruments, these princes can do
nothing. Whoever uses instruments, in finding helps, finds also
impediments. Their power is, therefore, by no means complete, nor
are they safe in extreme abuse. Such persons, however elevated by
flattery, arrogance, and self-opinion, must be sensible that,
whether covered or not by positive law, in some way or other they
are accountable even here for the abuse of their trust. If they are
not cut off by a rebellion of their people, they may be strangled by
the very janissaries kept for their security against all other
rebellion. Thus we have seen the king of France sold by his soldiers
for an increase of pay. But where popular authority is absolute and
unrestrained, the people have an infinitely greater, because a far
better founded, confidence in their own power. They are themselves, in
a great measure, their own instruments. They are nearer to their
objects. Besides, they are less under responsibility to one of the
greatest controlling powers on the earth, the sense of fame and
estimation. The share of infamy that is likely to fall to the lot of
each individual in public acts is small indeed, the operation of
opinion being in the inverse ratio to the number of those who abuse
power. Their own approbation of their own acts has to them the
appearance of a public judgment in their favor. A perfect democracy
is, therefore, the most shameless thing in the world. As it is the
most shameless, it is also the most fearless. No man apprehends in his
person that he can be made subject to punishment. Certainly the people
at large never ought, for as all punishments are for example toward
the conservation of the people at large, the people at large can never
become the subject of punishment by any human hand.* It is therefore
of infinite importance that they should not be suffered to imagine
that their will, any more than that of kings, is the standard of right
and wrong. They ought to be persuaded that they are full as little
entitled, and far less qualified with safety to themselves, to use any
arbitrary power whatsoever; that therefore they are not, under a false
show of liberty, but in truth to exercise an unnatural, inverted
domination, tyrannically to exact from those who officiate in the
state not an entire devotion to their interest, which is their
right, but an abject submission to their occasional will,
extinguishing thereby in all those who serve them all moral principle,
all sense of dignity, all use of judgment, and all consistency of
character; whilst by the very same process they give themselves up a
proper, a suitable, but a most contemptible prey to the servile
ambition of popular sycophants or courtly flatterers.
    When the people have emptied themselves of all the lust of selfish
will, which without religion it is utterly impossible they ever
should, when they are conscious that they exercise, and exercise
perhaps in a higher link of the order of delegation, the power,
which to be legitimate must be according to that eternal, immutable
law in which will and reason are the same, they will be more careful
how they place power in base and incapable hands. In their
nomination to office, they will not appoint to the exercise of
authority as to a pitiful job, but as to a holy function, not
according to their sordid, selfish interest, nor to their wanton
caprice, nor to their arbitrary will, but they will confer that
power (which any man may well tremble to give or to receive) on
those only in whom they may discern that predominant proportion of
active virtue and wisdom, taken together and fitted to the charge,
such as in the great and inevitable mixed mass of human
    When they are habitually convinced that no evil can be acceptable,
either in the act or the permission, to him whose essence is good,
they will be better able to extirpate out of the minds of all
magistrates, civil, ecclesiastical, or military, anything that bears
the least resemblance to a proud and lawless domination.
    But one of the first and most leading principles on which the
commonwealth and the laws are consecrated is, lest the temporary
possessors and life-renters in it, unmindful of what they have
received from their ancestors or of what is due to their posterity,
should act as if they were the entire masters, that they should not
think it among their rights to cut off the entail or commit waste on
the inheritance by destroying at their pleasure the whole original
fabric of their society, hazarding to leave to those who come after
them a ruin instead of an habitation- and teaching these successors as
little to respect their contrivances as they had themselves
respected the institutions of their forefathers. By this
unprincipled facility of changing the state as often, and as much, and
in as many ways as there are floating fancies or fashions, the whole
chain and continuity of the commonwealth would be broken. No one
generation could link with the other. Men would become little better
    And first of all, the science of jurisprudence, the pride of the
human intellect, which with all its defects, redundancies, and
errors is the collected reason of ages, combining the principles of
original justice with the infinite variety of human concerns, as a
heap of old exploded errors, would be no longer studied. Personal
self-sufficiency and arrogance (the certain attendants upon all
those who have never experienced a wisdom greater than their own)
would usurp the tribunal. Of course, no certain laws, establishing
invariable grounds of hope and fear, would keep the actions of men
in a certain course or direct them to a certain end. Nothing stable in
the modes of holding property or exercising function could form a
solid ground on which any parent could speculate in the education of
his offspring or in a choice for their future establishment in the
world. No principles would be early worked into the habits. As soon as
the most able instructor had completed his laborious course of
institution, instead of sending forth his pupil, accomplished in a
virtuous discipline, fitted to procure him attention and respect in
his place in society, he would find everything altered, and that he
had turned out a poor creature to the contempt and derision of the
world, ignorant of the true grounds of estimation. Who would insure
a tender and delicate sense of honor to beat almost with the first
pulses of the heart when no man could know what would be the test of
honor in a nation continually varying the standard of its coin? No
part of life would retain its acquisitions. Barbarism with regard to
science and literature, unskilfulness with regard to arts and
manufactures, would infallibly succeed to the want of a steady
education and settled principle; and thus the commonwealth itself
would, in a few generations, crumble away, be disconnected into the
dust and powder of individuality, and at length dispersed to all the
    To avoid, therefore, the evils of inconstancy and versatility, ten
thousand times worse than those of obstinacy and the blindest
prejudice, we have consecrated the state, that no man should
approach to look into its defects or corruptions but with due caution,
that he should never dream of beginning its reformation by its
subversion, that he should approach to the faults of the state as to
the wounds of a father, with pious awe and trembling solicitude. By
this wise prejudice we are taught to look with horror on those
children of their country who are prompt rashly to hack that aged
parent in pieces and put him into the kettle of magicians, in hopes
that by their poisonous weeds and wild incantations they may
regenerate the paternal constitution and renovate their father's life.
    SOCIETY is indeed a contract. Subordinate contracts for objects of
mere occasional interest may be dissolved at pleasure- but the state
ought not to be considered as nothing better than a partnership
agreement in a trade of pepper and coffee, calico, or tobacco, or some
other such low concern, to be taken up for a little temporary
interest, and to be dissolved by the fancy of the parties. It is to be
looked on with other reverence, because it is not a partnership in
things subservient only to the gross animal existence of a temporary
and perishable nature. It is a partnership in all science; a
partnership in all art; a partnership in every virtue and in all
perfection. As the ends of such a partnership cannot be obtained in
many generations, it becomes a partnership not only between those
who are living, but between those who are living, those who are
dead, and those who are to be born. Each contract of each particular
state is but a clause in the great primeval contract of eternal
society, linking the lower with the higher natures, connecting the
visible and invisible world, according to a fixed compact sanctioned
by the inviolable oath which holds all physical and all moral natures,
each in their appointed place. This law is not subject to the will
of those who by an obligation above them, and infinitely superior, are
bound to submit their will to that law. The municipal corporations
of that universal kingdom are not morally at liberty at their
pleasure, and on their speculations of a contingent improvement,
wholly to separate and tear asunder the bands of their subordinate
community and to dissolve it into an unsocial, uncivil, unconnected
chaos of elementary principles. It is the first and supreme
necessity only, a necessity that is not chosen but chooses, a
necessity paramount to deliberation, that admits no discussion and
demands no evidence, which alone can justify a resort to anarchy. This
necessity is no exception to the rule, because this necessity itself
is a part, too, of that moral and physical disposition of things to
which man must be obedient by consent or force; but if that which is
only submission to necessity should be made the object of choice,
the law is broken, nature is disobeyed, and the rebellious are
outlawed, cast forth, and exiled from this world of reason, and order,
and peace, and virtue, and fruitful penitence, into the antagonist
world of madness, discord, vice, confusion, and unavailing sorrow.
    These, my dear Sir, are, were, and, I think, long will be the
sentiments of not the least learned and reflecting part of this
kingdom. They who are included in this description form their opinions
on such grounds as such persons ought to form them. The less inquiring
receive them from an authority which those whom Providence dooms to
live on trust need not be ashamed to rely on. These two sorts of men
move in the same direction, though in a different place. They both
move with the order of the universe. They all know or feel this
great ancient truth: Quod illi principi et praepotenti Deo qui omnem
hunc mundum regit, nihil eorum quae quidem fiant in terris acceptius
quam concilia et coetus hominum jure sociati quae civitates
appellantur. They take this tenet of the head and heart, not from
the great name which it immediately bears, nor from the greater from
whence it is derived, but from that which alone can give true weight
and sanction to any learned opinion, the common nature and common
relation of men. Persuaded that all things ought to be done with
reference, and referring all to the point of reference to which all
should be directed, they think themselves bound, not only as
individuals in the sanctuary of the heart or as congregated in that
personal capacity, to renew the memory of their high origin and
cast, but also in their corporate character to perform their
national homage to the institutor and author and protector of civil
society; without which civil society man could not by any
possibility arrive at the perfection of which his nature is capable,
nor even make a remote and faint approach to it. They conceive that He
who gave our nature to be perfected by our virtue willed also the
necessary means of its perfection. He willed therefore the state- He
willed its connection with the source and original archetype of all
perfection. They who are convinced of this His will, which is the
law of laws and the sovereign of sovereigns, cannot think it
reprehensible that this our corporate fealty and homage, that this our
recognition of a seigniory paramount, I had almost said this
oblation of the state itself as a worthy offering on the high altar of
universal praise, should be performed as all public, solemn acts are
performed, in buildings, in music, in decoration, in speech, in the
dignity of persons, according to the customs of mankind taught by
their nature; that is, with modest splendor and unassuming state, with
mild majesty and sober pomp. For those purposes they think some part
of the wealth of the country is as usefully employed as it can be in
fomenting the luxury of individuals. It is the public ornament. It
is the public consolation. It nourishes the public hope. The poorest
man finds his own importance and dignity in it, whilst the wealth
and pride of individuals at every moment makes the man of humble
rank and fortune sensible of his inferiority and degrades and vilifies
his condition. It is for the man in humble life, and to raise his
nature and to put him in mind of a state in which the privileges of
opulence will cease, when he will be equal by nature, and may be
more than equal by virtue, that this portion of the general wealth
    I assure you I do not aim at singularity. I give you opinions
which have been accepted amongst us, from very early times to this
moment, with a continued and general approbation, and which indeed are
worked into my mind that I am unable to distinguish what I have
learned from others from the results of my own meditation.
    It is on some such principles that the majority of the people of
England, far from thinking a religious national establishment
unlawful, hardly think it lawful to be without one. In France you
are wholly mistaken if you do not believe us above all other things
attached to it, and beyond all other nations; and when this people has
acted unwisely and unjustifiably in its favor (as in some instances
they have done most certainly), in their very errors you will at least
    This principle runs through the whole system of their polity. They
do not consider their church establishment as convenient, but as
essential to their state, not as a thing heterogeneous and
separable, something added for accommodation, what they may either
keep or lay aside according to their temporary ideas of convenience.
They consider it as the foundation of their whole constitution, with
which, and with every part of which, it holds an indissoluble union.
Church and state are ideas inseparable in their minds, and scarcely is
the one ever mentioned without mentioning the other.
    Our education is so formed as to confirm and fix this
impression. Our education is in a manner wholly in the hands of
ecclesiastics, and in all stages from infancy to manhood. Even when
our youth, leaving schools and universities, enter that most important
period of life which begins to link experience and study together, and
when with that view they visit other countries, instead of old
domestics whom we have seen as governors to principal men from other
parts, three-fourths of those who go abroad with our young nobility
and gentlemen are ecclesiastics, not as austere masters, nor as mere
followers, but as friends and companions of a graver character, and
not seldom persons as well-born as themselves. With them, as
relations, they most constantly keep a close connection through
life. By this connection we conceive that we attach our gentlemen to
the church, and we liberalize the church by an intercourse with the
    So tenacious are we of the old ecclesiastical modes and fashions
of institution that very little alteration has been made in them since
the fourteenth or fifteenth century; adhering in this particular, as
in all things else, to our old settled maxim, never entirely nor at
once to depart from antiquity. We found these old institutions, on the
whole, favorable to morality and discipline, and we thought they
were susceptible of amendment without altering the ground. We
thought that they were capable of receiving and meliorating, and above
all of preserving, the accessions of science and literature, as the
order of Providence should successively produce them. And after all,
with this Gothic and monkish education (for such it is in the
groundwork) we may put in our claim to as ample and as early a share
in all the improvements in science, in arts, and in literature which
have illuminated and adorned the modern world, as any other nation
in Europe. We think one main cause of this improvement was our not
despising the patrimony of knowledge which was left us by our
    It is from our attachment to a church establishment that the
English nation did not think it wise to entrust that great,
fundamental interest of the whole to what they trust no part of
their civil or military public service, that is, to the unsteady and
precarious contribution of individuals. They go further. They
certainly never have suffered, and never will suffer, the fixed estate
of the church to be converted into a pension, to depend on the
treasury and to be delayed, withheld, or perhaps to be extinguished by
fiscal difficulties, which difficulties may sometimes be pretended for
political purposes, and are in fact often brought on by the
extravagance, negligence, and rapacity of politicians. The people of
England think that they have constitutional motives, as well as
religious, against any project of turning their independent clergy
into ecclesiastical pensioners of state. They tremble for their
liberty, from the influence of a clergy dependent on the crown; they
tremble for the public tranquillity from the disorders of a factious
clergy, if it were made to depend upon any other than the crown.
They therefore made their church, like their king and their
    From the united considerations of religion and constitutional
policy, from their opinion of a duty to make sure provision for the
consolation of the feeble and the instruction of the ignorant, they
have incorporated and identified the estate of the church with the
mass of private property, of which the state is not the proprietor,
either for use or dominion, but the guardian only and the regulator.
They have ordained that the provision of this establishment might be
as stable as the earth on which it stands, and should not fluctuate
    The men of England, the men, I mean, of light and leading in
England, whose wisdom (if they have any) is open and direct, would
be ashamed, as of a silly deceitful trick, to profess any religion
in name which, by their proceedings, they appear to contemn. If by
their conduct (the only language that rarely lies) they seemed to
regard the great ruling principle of the moral and the natural world
as a mere invention to keep the vulgar in obedience, they apprehend
that by such a conduct they would defeat the politic purpose they have
in view. They would find it difficult to make others believe in a
system to which they manifestly give no credit themselves. The
Christian statesmen of this land would indeed first provide for the
multitude, because it is the multitude, and is therefore, as such, the
first object in the ecclesiastical institution, and in all
institutions. They have been taught that the circumstance of the
gospel's being preached to the poor was one of the great tests of
its true mission. They think, therefore, that those do not believe
it who do not take care it should be preached to the poor. But as they
know that charity is not confined to any one description, but ought to
apply itself to all men who have wants, they are not deprived of a due
and anxious sensation of pity to the distresses of the miserable
great. They are not repelled through a fastidious delicacy, at the
stench of their arrogance and presumption, from a medicinal
attention to their mental blotches and running sores. They are
sensible that religious instruction is of more consequence to them
than to any others- from the greatness of the temptation to which they
are exposed; from the important consequences that attend their faults;
from the contagion of their ill example; from the necessity of
bowing down the stubborn neck of their pride and ambition to the
yoke of moderation and virtue; from a consideration of the fat
stupidity and gross ignorance concerning what imports men most to
know, which prevails at courts, and at the head of armies, and in
    The English people are satisfied that to the great the
consolations of religion are as necessary as its instructions. They,
too, are among the unhappy. They feel personal pain and domestic
sorrow. In these they have no privilege, but are subject to pay
their full contingent to the contributions levied on mortality. They
want this sovereign balm under their gnawing cares and anxieties,
which, being less conversant about the limited wants of animal life,
range without limit, and are diversified by infinite combinations,
in the wild and unbounded regions of imagination. Some charitable dole
is wanting to these our often very unhappy brethren to fill the gloomy
void that reigns in minds which have nothing on earth to hope or fear;
something to relieve in the killing languor and overlabored
lassitude of those who have nothing to do; something to excite an
appetite to existence in the palled satiety which attends on all
pleasures which may be bought where nature is not left to her own
process, where even desire is anticipated, and therefore fruition
defeated by meditated schemes and contrivances of delight; and no
interval, no obstacle, is interposed between the wish and the
    The people of England know how little influence the teachers of
religion are likely to have with the wealthy and powerful of long
standing, and how much less with the newly fortunate, if they appear
in a manner no way assorted to those with whom they must associate,
and over whom they must even exercise, in some cases, something like
an authority. What must they think of that body of teachers if they
see it in no part above the establishment of their domestic
servants? If the poverty were voluntary, there might be some
difference. Strong instances of self-denial operate powerfully on
our minds, and a man who has no wants has obtained great freedom and
firmness and even dignity. But as the mass of any description of men
are but men, and their poverty cannot be voluntary, that disrespect
which attends upon all lay poverty will not depart from the
ecclesiastical. Our provident constitution has therefore taken care
that those who are to instruct presumptuous ignorance, those who are
to be censors over insolent vice, should neither incur their
contempt nor live upon their alms, nor will it tempt the rich to a
neglect of the true medicine of their minds. For these reasons, whilst
we provide first for the poor, and with a parental solicitude, we have
not relegated religion (like something we were ashamed to show) to
obscure municipalities or rustic villages. No! we will have her to
exalt her mitred front in courts and parliaments. We will have her
mixed throughout the whole mass of life and blended with all the
classes of society. The people of England will show to the haughty
potentates of the world, and to their talking sophisters, that a free,
a generous, an informed nation honors the high magistrates of its
church; that it will not suffer the insolence of wealth and titles, or
any other species of proud pretension, to look down with scorn upon
what they looked up to with reverence; nor presume to trample on
that acquired personal nobility which they intend always to be, and
which often is, the fruit, not the reward (for what can be the
reward?) of learning, piety, and virtue. They can see, without pain or
grudging, an archbishop precede a duke. They can see a bishop of
Durham, or a bishop of Winchester, in possession of ten thousand
pounds a year, and cannot conceive why it is in worse hands than
estates to the like amount in the hands of this earl or that squire,
although it may be true that so many dogs and horses are not kept by
the former and fed with the victuals which ought to nourish the
children of the people. It is true, the whole church revenue is not
always employed, and to every shilling, in charity, nor perhaps
ought it, but something is generally employed. It is better to cherish
virtue and humanity by leaving much to free will, even with some
loss to the object, than to attempt to make men mere machines and
instruments of a political benevolence. The world on the whole will
gain by a liberty without which virtue cannot exist.
    When once the commonwealth has established the estates of the
church as property, it can, consistently, hear nothing of the more
or the less. "Too much" and "too little" are treason against property.
What evil can arise from the quantity in any hand whilst the supreme
authority has the full, sovereign superintendence over this, as over
all property, to prevent every species of abuse, and, whenever it
notably deviates, to give to it a direction agreeable to the
    In England most of us conceive that it is envy and malignity
toward those who are often the beginners of their own fortune, and not
a love of the self-denial and mortification of the ancient church,
that makes some look askance at the distinctions, and honors, and
revenues which, taken from no person, are set apart for virtue. The
ears of the people of England are distinguishing. They hear these
men speak broad. Their tongue betrays them. Their language is in the
patois of fraud, in the cant and gibberish of hypocrisy. The people of
England must think so when these praters affect to carry back the
clergy to that primitive, evangelic poverty which, in the spirit,
ought always to exist in them (and in us, too, however we may like
it), but in the thing must be varied when the relation of that body to
the state is altered- when manners, when modes of life, when indeed
the whole order of human affairs has undergone a total revolution.
We shall believe those reformers, then, to be honest enthusiasts, not,
as now we think them, cheats and deceivers, when we see them
throwing their own goods into common and submitting their own
persons to the austere discipline of the early church.
    With these ideas rooted in their minds, the commons of Great
Britain, in the national emergencies, will never seek their resource
from the confiscation of the estates of the church and poor. Sacrilege
and proscription are not among the ways and means of our committee
of supply. The Jews in Change Alley have not yet dared to hint their
hopes of a mortgage on the revenues belonging to the see of
Canterbury. I am not afraid that I shall be disavowed when I assure
you that there is not one public man in this kingdom whom you would
wish to quote, no, not one, of any party or description, who does
not reprobate the dishonest, perfidious, and cruel confiscation
which the National Assembly has been compelled to make of that
property which it was their first duty to protect.
    It is with the exultation of a little national pride I tell you
that those amongst us who have wished to pledge the societies of Paris
in the cup of their abominations have been disappointed. The robbery
of your church has proved a security to the possession of ours. It has
roused the people. They see with horror and alarm that enormous and
shameless act of proscription. It has opened, and will more and more
open, their eyes upon the selfish enlargement of mind and the narrow
liberality of sentiment of insidious men, which, commencing in close
hypocrisy and fraud, have ended in open violence and rapine. At home
we behold similar beginnings. We are on our guard against similar
    I HOPE WE SHALL NEVER be so totally lost to all sense of the
duties imposed upon us by the law of social union as, upon any pretext
of public service, to confiscate the goods of a single unoffending
citizen. Who but a tyrant (a name expressive of everything which can
vitiate and degrade human nature) could think of seizing on the
property of men unaccused, unheard, untried, by whole descriptions, by
hundreds and thousands together? Who that had not lost every trace
of humanity could think of casting down men of exalted rank and sacred
function, some of them of an age to call at once for reverence and
compassion, of casting them down from the highest situation in the
commonwealth, wherein they were maintained by their own landed
property, to a state of indigence, depression, and contempt?
    The confiscators truly have made some allowance to their victims
from the scraps and fragments of their own tables from which they have
been so harshly driven, and which have been so bountifully spread
for a feast to the harpies of usury. But to drive men from
independence to live on alms is itself great cruelty. That which might
be a tolerable condition to men in one state of life, and not
habituated to other things, may, when all these circumstances are
altered, be a dreadful revolution, and one to which a virtuous mind
would feel pain in condemning any guilt except that which would demand
the life of the offender. But to many minds this punishment of
degradation and infamy is worse than death. Undoubtedly it is an
infinite aggravation of this cruel suffering that the persons who were
taught a double prejudice in favor of religion, by education and by
the place they held in the administration of its functions, are to
receive the remnants of their property as alms from the profane and
impious hands of those who had plundered them of all the rest; to
receive (if they are at all to receive), not from the charitable
contributions of the faithful but from the insolent tenderness of
known and avowed atheism, the maintenance of religion measured out
to them on the standard of the contempt in which it is held, and for
the purpose of rendering those who receive the allowance vile and of
    But this act of seizure of property, it seems, is a judgment in
law, and not a confiscation. They have, it seems, found out in the
academies of the Palais Royal and the Jacobins that certain men had no
right to the possessions which they held under law, usage, the
decisions of courts, and the accumulated prescription of a thousand
years. They say that ecclesiastics are fictitious persons, creatures
of the state, whom at pleasure they may destroy, and of course limit
and modify in every particular; that the goods they possess are not
properly theirs but belong to the state which created the fiction; and
we are therefore not to trouble ourselves with what they may suffer in
their natural feelings and natural persons on account of what is
done toward them in this their constructive character. Of what
import is it under what names you injure men and deprive them of the
just emoluments of a profession, in which they were not only permitted
but encouraged by the state to engage, and upon the supposed certainty
of which emoluments they had formed the plan of their lives,
contracted debts, and led multitudes to an entire dependence upon
    You do not imagine, Sir, that I am going to compliment this
miserable distinction of persons with any long discussion. The
arguments of tyranny are as contemptible as its force is dreadful. Had
not your confiscators, by their early crimes, obtained a power which
secures indemnity to all the crimes of which they have since been
guilty or that they can commit, it is not the syllogism of the
logician, but the lash of the executioner, that would have refuted a
sophistry which becomes an accomplice of theft and murder. The
sophistic tyrants of Paris are loud in their declamations against
the departed regal tyrants, who in former ages have vexed the world.
They are thus bold, because they are safe from the dungeons and iron
cages of their old masters. Shall we be more tender of the tyrants
of our own time, when we see them acting worse tragedies under our
eyes? Shall we not use the same liberty that they do, when we can
use it with the same safety- when to speak honest truth only
requires a contempt of the opinions of those whose actions we abhor?
    This outrage on all the rights of property was at first covered
with what, on the system of their conduct, was the most astonishing of
all pretexts- a regard to national faith. The enemies to property at
first pretended a most tender, delicate, and scrupulous anxiety for
keeping the king's engagements with the public creditor. These
professors of the rights of men are so busy in teaching others that
they have not leisure to learn anything themselves; otherwise they
would have known that it is to the property of the citizen, and not to
the demands of the creditor of the state, that the first and
original faith of civil society is pledged. The claim of the citizen
is prior in time, paramount in title, superior in equity. The fortunes
of individuals, whether possessed by acquisition or by descent or in
virtue of a participation in the goods of some community, were no part
of the creditor's security, expressed or implied. They never so much
as entered into his head when he made his bargain. He well knew that
the public, whether represented by a monarch or by a senate, can
pledge nothing but the public estate; and it can have no public estate
except in what it derives from a just and proportioned imposition upon
the citizens at large. This was engaged, and nothing else could be
engaged, to the public creditor. No man can mortgage his injustice
    It is impossible to avoid some observation on the contradictions
caused by the extreme rigor and the extreme laxity of this new
public faith which influenced in this transaction, and which
influenced not according to the nature of the obligation, but to the
description of the persons to whom it was engaged. No acts of the
old government of the kings of France are held valid in the National
Assembly except its pecuniary engagements: acts of all others of the
most ambiguous legality. The rest of the acts of that royal government
are considered in so odious a light that to have a claim under its
authority is looked on as a sort of crime. A pension, given as a
reward for service to the state, is surely as good a ground of
property as any security for money advanced to the state. It is
better; for money is paid, and well paid, to obtain that service. We
have, however, seen multitudes of people under this description in
France who never had been deprived of their allowances by the most
arbitrary ministers in the most arbitrary times, by this assembly of
the rights of men robbed without mercy. They were told, in answer to
their claim to the bread earned with their blood, that their
services had not been rendered to the country that now exists.
    This laxity of public faith is not confined to those unfortunate
persons. The Assembly, with perfect consistency it must be owned, is
engaged in a respectable deliberation how far it is bound by the
treaties made with other nations under the former government, and
their committee is to report which of them they ought to ratify, and
which not. By this means they have put the external fidelity of this
    It is not easy to conceive upon what rational principle the
royal government should not, of the two, rather have possessed the
power of rewarding service and making treaties, in virtue of its
prerogative, than that of pledging to creditors the revenue of the
state, actual and possible. The treasure of the nation, of all things,
has been the least allowed to the prerogative of the king of France or
to the prerogative of any king in Europe. To mortgage the public
revenue implies the sovereign dominion, in the fullest sense, over the
public purse. It goes far beyond the trust even of a temporary and
occasional taxation. The acts, however, of that dangerous power (the
distinctive mark of a boundless despotism) have been alone held
sacred. Whence arose this preference given by a democratic assembly to
a body of property deriving its title from the most critical and
obnoxious of all the exertions of monarchical authority? Reason can
furnish nothing to reconcile inconsistency, nor can partial favor be
accounted for upon equitable principles. But the contradiction and
partiality which admit no justification are not the less without an
adequate cause; and that cause I do not think it difficult to
    By the vast debt of France a great monied interest had
insensibly grown up, and with it a great power. By the ancient
usages which prevailed in that kingdom, the general circulation of
property, and in particular the mutual convertibility of land into
money, and of money into land, had always been a matter of difficulty.
Family settlements, rather more general and more strict than they
are in England, the jus retractus, the great mass of landed property
held by the crown, and, by a maxim of the French law, held
unalienably, the vast estates of the ecclesiastical corporations-
all these had kept the landed and monied interests more separated in
France, less miscible, and the owners of the two distinct species of
property not so well disposed to each other as they are in this
    The monied property was long looked on with rather an evil eye
by the people. They saw it connected with their distresses, and
aggravating them. It was no less envied by the old landed interests,
partly for the same reasons that rendered it obnoxious to the
people, but much more so as it eclipsed, by the splendor of an
ostentatious luxury, the unendowed pedigrees and naked titles of
several among the nobility. Even when the nobility which represented
the more permanent landed interest united themselves by marriage
(which sometimes was the case) with the other description, the
wealth which saved the family from ruin was supposed to contaminate
and degrade it. Thus the enmities and heartburnings of these parties
were increased even by the usual means by which discord is made to
cease and quarrels are turned into friendship. In the meantime, the
pride of the wealthy men, not noble or newly noble, increased with its
cause. They felt with resentment an inferiority, the grounds of
which they did not acknowledge. There was no measure to which they
were not willing to lend themselves in order to be revenged of the
outrages of this rival pride and to exalt their wealth to what they
considered as its natural rank and estimation. They struck at the
nobility through the crown and the church. They attacked them
particularly on the side on which they thought them the most
vulnerable, that is, the possessions of the church, which, through the
patronage of the crown, generally devolved upon the nobility. The
bishoprics and the great commendatory abbeys were, with few
    In this state of real, though not always perceived, warfare
between the noble ancient landed interest and the new monied interest,
the greatest, because the most applicable, strength was in the hands
of the latter. The monied interest is in its nature more ready for any
adventure, and its possessors more disposed to new enterprises of
any kind. Being of a recent acquisition, it falls in more naturally
with any novelties. It is therefore the kind of wealth which will be
    Along with the monied interest, a new description of men had grown
up with whom that interest soon formed a close and marked union- I
mean the political men of letters. Men of letters, fond of
distinguishing themselves, are rarely averse to innovation. Since
the decline of the life and greatness of Louis the Fourteenth, they
were not so much cultivated, either by him or by the regent or the
successors to the crown, nor were they engaged to the court by
favors and emoluments so systematically as during the splendid
period of that ostentatious and not impolitic reign. What they lost in
the old court protection, they endeavored to make up by joining in a
sort of incorporation of their own; to which the two academies of
France, and afterwards the vast undertaking of the Encyclopedia,
carried on by a society of these gentlemen, did not a little
    The literary cabal had some years ago formed something like a
regular plan for the destruction of the Christian religion. This
object they pursued with a degree of zeal which hitherto had been
discovered only in the propagators of some system of piety. They
were possessed with a spirit of proselytism in the most fanatical
degree; and from thence, by an easy progress, with the spirit of
persecution according to their means.* What was not to be done
toward their great end by any direct or immediate act might be wrought
by a longer process through the medium of opinion. To command that
opinion, the first step is to establish a dominion over those who
direct it. They contrived to possess themselves, with great method and
perseverance, of all the avenues to literary fame. Many of them indeed
stood high in the ranks of literature and science. The world had
done them justice and in favor of general talents forgave the evil
tendency of their peculiar principles. This was true liberality, which
they returned by endeavoring to confine the reputation of sense,
learning, and taste to themselves or their followers. I will venture
to say that this narrow, exclusive spirit has not been less
prejudicial to literature and to taste than to morals and true
philosophy. These atheistical fathers have a bigotry of their own, and
they have learned to talk against monks with the spirit of a monk. But
in some things they are men of the world. The resources of intrigue
are called in to supply the defects of argument and wit. To this
system of literary monopoly was joined an unremitting industry to
blacken and discredit in every way, and by every means, all those
who did not hold to their faction. To those who have observed the
spirit of their conduct it has long been clear that nothing was wanted
but the power of carrying the intolerance of the tongue and of the pen
into a persecution which would strike at property, liberty, and life.
    * This (down to the end of the first sentence in the next
paragraph) and some other parts here and there were inserted, on his
    The desultory and faint persecution carried on against them,
more from compliance with form and decency than with serious
resentment, neither weakened their strength nor relaxed their efforts.
The issue of the whole was that, what with opposition, and what with
success, a violent and malignant zeal, of a kind hitherto unknown in
the world, had taken an entire possession of their minds and
rendered their whole conversation, which otherwise would have been
pleasing and instructive, perfectly disgusting. A spirit of cabal,
intrigue, and proselytism pervaded all their thoughts, words, and
actions. And as controversial zeal soon turns its thoughts on force,
they began to insinuate themselves into a correspondence with
foreign princes, in hopes through their authority, which at first they
flattered, they might bring about the changes they had in view. To
them it was indifferent whether these changes were to be
accomplished by the thunderbolt of despotism or by the earthquake of
popular commotion. The correspondence between this cabal and the
late king of Prussia will throw no small light upon the spirit of
all their proceedings.* For the same purpose for which they
intrigued with princes, they cultivated, in a distinguished manner,
the monied interest of France; and partly through the means
furnished by those whose peculiar offices gave them the most extensive
and certain means of communication, they carefully occupied all the
    * I do not choose to shock the feeling of the moral reader with
any quotation of their vulgar, base, and profane language.
    Writers, especially when they act in a body and with one
direction, have great influence on the public mind; the alliance,
therefore, of these writers with the monied interest* had no small
effect in removing the popular odium and envy which attended that
species of wealth. These writers, like the propagators of all
novelties, pretended to a great zeal for the poor and the lower
orders, whilst in their satires they rendered hateful, by every
exaggeration, the faults of courts, of nobility, and of priesthood.
They became a sort of demagogues. They served as a link to unite, in
favor of one object, obnoxious wealth to restless and desperate
    * Their connection with Turgot and almost all the people of the
    As these two kinds of men appear principal leaders in all the late
transactions, their junction and politics will serve to account, not
upon any principles of law or of policy, but as a cause, for the
general fury with which all the landed property of ecclesiastical
corporations has been attacked; and the great care which, contrary
to their pretended principles, has been taken of a monied interest
originating from the authority of the crown. All the envy against
wealth and power was artificially directed against other
descriptions of riches. On what other principle than that which I have
stated can we account for an appearance so extraordinary and unnatural
as that of the ecclesiastical possessions, which had stood so many
successions of ages and shocks of civil violences, and were girded
at once by justice and by prejudice, being applied to the payment of
debts comparatively recent, invidious, and contracted by a decried and
    WAS the public estate a sufficient stake for the public debts?
Assume that it was not, and that a loss must be incurred somewhere.-
When the only estate lawfully possessed, and which the contracting
parties had in contemplation at the time in which their bargain was
made, happens to fail, who according to the principles of natural
and legal equity ought to be the sufferer? Certainly it ought to be
either the party who trusted or the party who persuaded him to
trust, or both, and not third parties who had no concern with the
transaction. Upon any insolvency they ought to suffer who are weak
enough to lend upon bad security, or they who fraudulently held out
a security that was not valid. Laws are acquainted with no other rules
of decision. But by the new institute of the rights of men, the only
persons who in equity ought to suffer are the only persons who are
to be saved harmless: those are to answer the debt who neither were
    What had the clergy to do with these transactions? What had they
to do with any public engagement further than the extent of their
own debt? To that, to be sure, their estates were bound to the last
acre. Nothing can lead more to the true spirit of the Assembly,
which sits for public confiscation, with its new equity and its new
morality, than an attention to their proceeding with regard to this
debt of the clergy. The body of confiscators, true to that monied
interest for which they were false to every other, have found the
clergy competent to incur a legal debt. Of course, they declared
them legally entitled to the property which their power of incurring
the debt and mortgaging the estate implied, recognizing the rights
of those persecuted citizens in the very act in which they were thus
    If, as I said, any persons are to make good deficiencies to the
public creditor, besides the public at large, they must be those who
managed the agreement. Why, therefore, are not the estates of all
the comptrollers-general confiscated?* Why not those of the long
succession of ministers, financiers, and bankers who have been
enriched whilst the nation was impoverished by their dealings and
their counsels? Why is not the estate of M. Laborde declared forfeited
rather than of the archbishop of Paris, who has had nothing to do in
the creation or in the jobbing of the public funds? Or, if you must
confiscate old landed estates in favor of the money-jobbers, why is
the penalty confined to one description? I do not know whether the
expenses of the Duke de Choiseul have left anything of the infinite
sums which he had derived from the bounty of his master during the
transactions of a reign which contributed largely by every species
of prodigality in war and peace to the present debt of France. If
any such remains, why is not this confiscated? I remember to have been
in Paris during the time of the old government. I was there just after
the Duke d'Aiguillon had been snatched (as it was generally thought)
from the block by the hand of a protecting despotism. He was a
minister and had some concern in the affairs of that prodigal
period. Why do I not see his estate delivered up to the municipalities
in which it is situated? The noble family of Noailles have long been
servants (meritorious servants I admit) to the crown of France, and
have had, of course, some share in its bounties. Why do I hear nothing
of the application of their estates to the public debt? Why is the
estate of the Duke de Rochefoucault more sacred than that of the
Cardinal de Rochefoucault? The former is, I doubt not, a worthy
person, and (if it were not a sort of profaneness to talk of the
use, as affecting the title to the property) he makes a good use of
his revenues; but it is no disrespect to him to say, what authentic
information well warrants me in saying, that the use made of a
property equally valid by his brother,*(2) the cardinal archbishop
of Rouen, was far more laudable and far more public-spirited. Can
one hear of the proscription of such persons and the confiscation of
their effects without indignation and horror? He is not a man who does
not feel such emotions on such occasions. He does not deserve the name
    *(2) Not his brother nor any near relation; but this mistake
    Few barbarous conquerors have ever made so terrible a revolution
in property. None of the heads of the Roman factions, when they
established crudelem illam hastam in all their auctions of rapine,
have ever set up to sale the goods of the conquered citizen to such an
enormous amount. It must be allowed in favor of those tyrants of
antiquity that what was done by them could hardly be said to be done
in cold blood. Their passions were inflamed, their tempers soured,
their understandings confused with the spirit of revenge, with the
innumerable reciprocated and recent inflictions and retaliations of
blood and rapine. They were driven beyond all bounds of moderation
by the apprehension of the return of power, with the return of
property, to the families of those they had injured beyond all hope of
    These Roman confiscators, who were yet only in the elements of
tyranny, and were not instructed in the rights of men to exercise
all sorts of cruelties on each other without provocation, thought it
necessary to spread a sort of color over their injustice. They
considered the vanquished party as composed of traitors who had
borne arms, or otherwise had acted with hostility, against the
commonwealth. They regarded them as persons who had forfeited their
property by their crimes. With you, in your improved state of the
human mind, there was no such formality. You seized upon five millions
sterling of annual rent and turned forty or fifty thousand human
creatures out of their houses, because "such was your pleasure". The
tyrant Harry the Eighth of England, as he was not better enlightened
than the Roman Mariuses and Sullas, and had not studied in your new
schools, did not know what an effectual instrument of despotism was to
be found in that grand magazine of offensive weapons, the rights of
men. When he resolved to rob the abbeys, as the club of the Jacobins
have robbed all the ecclesiastics, he began by setting on foot a
commission to examine into the crimes and abuses which prevailed in
those communities. As it might be expected, his commission reported
truths, exaggerations, and falsehoods. But truly or falsely, it
reported abuses and offenses. However, as abuses might be corrected,
as every crime of persons does not infer a forfeiture with regard to
communities, and as property, in that dark age, was not discovered
to be a creature of prejudice, all those abuses (and there were enough
of them) were hardly thought sufficient ground for such a confiscation
as it was for his purpose to make. He, therefore, procured the
formal surrender of these estates. All these operose proceedings
were adopted by one of the most decided tyrants in the rolls of
history as necessary preliminaries before he could venture, by bribing
the members of his two servile houses with a share of the spoil and
holding out to them an eternal immunity from taxation, to demand a
confirmation of his iniquitous proceedings by an act of Parliament.
Had fate reserved him to our times, four technical terms would have
done his business and saved him all this trouble; he needed nothing
more than one short form of incantation- "Philosophy, Light,
    I can say nothing in praise of those acts of tyranny which no
voice has hitherto ever commended under any of their false colors, yet
in these false colors an homage was paid by despotism to justice.
The power which was above all fear and all remorse was not set above
all shame. Whilst shame keeps its watch, virtue is not wholly
extinguished in the heart, nor will moderation be utterly exiled
    I believe every honest man sympathizes in his reflections with our
political poet on that occasion, and will pray to avert the omen
whenever these acts of rapacious despotism present themselves to his
        Fall on our times, where ruin must reform.
        Tell me (my Muse) what monstrous dire offense,
        What crimes could any Christian king incense
        Were these their crimes? they were his own much more,
        But wealth is crime enough to him that's poor.*
        "Who having spent the treasures of his crown,
        And yet this act, to varnish o'er the shame
        Who fears not to do ill, yet fears the name,
        And, free from conscience, is a slave to fame.
        Thus he the church at once protects, and spoils;
        But princes' swords are sharper than their styles.
        And thus to th' ages past he makes amends,
        Their charity destroys, their faith defends.
        And, like the block, unmoved lay; but ours,
        As much too active, like the stork devours.
        Is there no temperate region can be known,
        Could we not wake from that lethargic dream,
        Can knowledge have no bound, but must advance
        Than, led by a false guide, to err by day?
        Who sees these dismal heaps, but would demand,
        But when he hears, no Goth, no Turk did bring
        When nothing, but the name of zeal, appears
        'Twixt our best actions and the worst of theirs,
        What does he think our sacrilege would spare,
        When such th' effects of our devotion are?"
                         COOPER'S HILL, by SIR JOHN DENHAM.
    This same wealth, which is at all times treason and lese nation to
indigent and rapacious despotism, under all modes of polity, was
your temptation to violate property, law, and religion, united in
one object. But was the state of France so wretched and undone that no
other recourse but rapine remained to preserve its existence? On
this point I wish to receive some information. When the states met,
was the condition of the finances of France such that, after
economizing on principles of justice and mercy through all
departments, no fair repartition of burdens upon all the orders
could possibly restore them? If such an equal imposition would have
been sufficient, you well know it might easily have been made. M.
Necker, in the budget which he laid before the orders assembled at
Versailles, made a detailed exposition of the state of the French
    * Rapport de Mons. le Directeur-General des Finances, fait par
    If we give credit to him, it was not necessary to have recourse to
any new impositions whatsoever to put the receipts of France on a
balance with its expenses. He stated the permanent charges of all
descriptions, including the interest of a new loan of four hundred
millions, at 531,444,000 livres; the fixed revenue at 475,294,000,
making the deficiency 56,150,000, or short of L2,200,000 sterling. But
to balance it, he brought forward savings and improvements of
revenue (considered as entirely certain) to rather more than the
amount of that deficiency; and he concludes with these emphatical
words (p. 39), "Quel pays, Messieurs, que celui, ou, sans impots et
avec de simples objets inappercus, on peut faire disparoitre un
deficit qui a fait tant de bruit en Europe". As to the
reimbursement, the sinking of debt, and the other great objects of
public credit and political arrangement indicated in Mons. Necker's
speech, no doubt could be entertained but that a very moderate and
proportioned assessment on the citizens without distinction would have
provided for all of them to the fullest extent of their demand.
    If this representation of Mons. Necker was false, then the
Assembly are in the highest degree culpable for having forced the king
to accept as his minister and, since the king's deposition, for having
employed as their minister a man who had been capable of abusing so
notoriously the confidence of his master and their own, in a matter,
too, of the highest moment and directly appertaining to his particular
office. But if the representation was exact (as having always, along
with you, conceived a high degree of respect for M. Necker, I make
no doubt it was), then what can be said in favor of those who, instead
of moderate, reasonable, and general contribution, have in cold blood,
and impelled by no necessity, had recourse to a partial and cruel
    Was that contribution refused on a pretext of privilege, either on
the part of the clergy or on that of the nobility? No, certainly. As
to the clergy, they even ran before the wishes of the third order.
Previous to the meeting of the states, they had in all their
instructions expressly directed their deputies to renounce every
immunity which put them upon a footing distinct from the condition
of their fellow subjects. In this renunciation the clergy were even
    But let us suppose that the deficiency had remained at the
fifty-six millions (or L2,200,000 sterling), as at first stated by
M. Necker. Let us allow that all the resources he opposed to that
deficiency were impudent and groundless fictions, and that the
Assembly (or their lords of articles* at the Jacobins) were from
thence justified in laying the whole burden of that deficiency on
the clergy- yet allowing all this, a necessity of L2,200,000
sterling will not support a confiscation to the amount of five
millions. The imposition of L2,200,000 on the clergy, as partial,
would have been oppressive and unjust, but it would not have been
altogether ruinous to those on whom it was imposed, and therefore it
would not have answered the real purpose of the managers.
    * In the constitution of Scotland, during the Stuart reigns, a
committee sat for preparing bills; and none could pass but those
previously approved by them. The committee was called "Lords of
    Perhaps persons unacquainted with the state of France, on
hearing the clergy and the noblesse were privileged in point of
taxation, may be led to imagine that, previous to the Revolution,
these bodies had contributed nothing to the state. This is a great
mistake. They certainly did not contribute equally with each other,
nor either of them equally with the commons. They both, however,
contributed largely. Neither nobility nor clergy enjoyed any exemption
from the excise on consumable commodities, from duties of custom, or
from any of the other numerous indirect impositions, which in
France, as well as here, make so very large a proportion of all
payments to the public. The noblesse paid the capitation. They paid
also a land-tax, called the twentieth penny, to the height sometimes
of three, sometimes of four, shillings in the pound- both of them
direct impositions of no light nature and no trivial produce. The
clergy of the provinces annexed by conquest to France (which in extent
make about an eighth part of the whole, but in wealth a much larger
proportion) paid likewise to the capitation and the twentieth penny,
at the rate paid by the nobility. The clergy in the old provinces
did not pay the capitation, but they had redeemed themselves at the
expense of about 24 millions, or a little more than a million
sterling. They were exempted from the twentieths; but then they made
free gifts, they contracted debts for the state, and they were subject
to some other charges, the whole computed at about a thirteenth part
of their clear income. They ought to have paid annually about forty
thousand pounds more to put them on a par with the contribution of the
    When the terrors of this tremendous proscription hung over the
clergy, they made an offer of a contribution through the archbishop of
Aix, which, for its extravagance, ought not to have been accepted. But
it was evidently and obviously more advantageous to the public
creditor than anything which could rationally be promised by the
confiscation. Why was it not accepted? The reason is plain: there
was no desire that the church should be brought to serve the state.
The service of the state was made a pretext to destroy the church.
In their way to the destruction of the church they would not scruple
to destroy their country; and they have destroyed it. One great end in
the project would have been defeated if the plan of extortion had been
adopted in lieu of the scheme of confiscation. The new landed interest
connected with the new republic, and connected with it for its very
being, could not have been created. This was among the reasons why
    THE madness of the project of confiscation, on the plan that was
first pretended, soon became apparent. To bring this unwieldy mass
of landed property, enlarged by the confiscation of all the vast
landed domain of the crown, at once into market was obviously to
defeat the profits proposed by the confiscation by depreciating the
value of those lands and, indeed, of all the landed estates throughout
France. Such a sudden diversion of all its circulating money from
trade to land must be an additional mischief What step was taken?
Did the Assembly, on becoming sensible of the inevitable ill effects
of their projected sale, revert to the offers of the clergy? No
distress could oblige them to travel in a course which was disgraced
by any appearance of justice. Giving over all hopes from a general
immediate sale, another project seems to have succeeded. They proposed
to take stock in exchange for the church lands. In that project
great difficulties arose in equalizing the objects to be exchanged.
Other obstacles also presented themselves, which threw them back again
upon some project of sale. The municipalities had taken an alarm. They
would not hear of transferring the whole plunder of the kingdom to the
stockholders in Paris. Many of those municipalities had been (upon
system) reduced to the most deplorable indigence. Money was nowhere to
be seen. They were, therefore, led to the point that was so ardently
desired. They panted for a currency of any kind which might revive
their perishing industry. The municipalities were then to be
admitted to a share in the spoil, which evidently rendered the first
scheme (if ever it had been seriously entertained) altogether
impracticable. Public exigencies pressed upon all sides. The
minister of finance reiterated his call for supply with a most urgent,
anxious, and boding voice. Thus pressed on all sides, instead of the
first plan of converting their bankers into bishops and abbots,
instead of paying the old debt, they contracted a new debt at 3 per
cent, creating a new paper currency founded on an eventual sale of the
church lands. They issued this paper currency to satisfy in the
first instance chiefly the demands made upon them by the bank of
discount, the great machine, or paper-mill, of their fictitious
    The spoil of the church was now become the only resource of all
their operations in finance, the vital principle of all their
politics, the sole security for the existence of their power. It was
necessary by all, even the most violent means, to put every individual
on the same bottom, and to bind the nation in one guilty interest to
uphold this act and the authority of those by whom it was done. In
order to force the most reluctant into a participation of their
pillage, they rendered their paper circulation compulsory in all
payments. Those who consider the general tendency of their schemes
to this one object as a center, and a center from which afterwards all
their measures radiate, will not think that I dwell too long upon this
    To cut off all appearance of connection between the crown and
public justice, and to bring the whole under implicit obedience to the
dictators in Paris, the old independent judicature of the parliaments,
with all its merits and all its faults, was wholly abolished. Whilst
the parliaments existed, it was evident that the people might some
time or other come to resort to them and rally under the standard of
their ancient laws. It became, however, a matter of consideration that
the magistrates and officers, in the courts now abolished, had
purchased their places at a very high rate, for which, as well as
for the duty they performed, they received but a very low return of
interest. Simple confiscation is a boon only for the clergy; to the
lawyers some appearances of equity are to be observed, and they are to
receive compensation to an immense amount. Their compensation
becomes part of the national debt, for the liquidation of which
there is the one exhaustless fund. The lawyers are to obtain their
compensation in the new church paper, which is to march with the new
principles of judicature and legislature. The dismissed magistrates
are to take their share of martyrdom with the ecclesiastics, or to
receive their own property from such a fund, and in such a manner,
as all those who have been seasoned with the ancient principles of
jurisprudence and had been the sworn guardians of property must look
upon with horror. Even the clergy are to receive their miserable
allowance out of the depreciated paper, which is stamped with the
indelible character of sacrilege and with the symbols of their own
ruin, or they must starve. So violent an outrage upon credit,
property, and liberty as this compulsory paper currency has seldom
been exhibited by the alliance of bankruptcy and tyranny, at any
    In the course of all these operations, at length comes out the
grand arcanum- that in reality, and in a fair sense, the lands of
the church (so far as anything certain can be gathered from their
proceedings) are not to be sold at all. By the late resolutions of the
National Assembly, they are, indeed, to be delivered to the highest
bidder. But it is to be observed that a certain portion only of the
purchase money is to be laid down. A period of twelve years is to be
given for the payment of the rest. The philosophic purchasers are
therefore, on payment of a sort of fine, to be put instantly into
possession of the estate. It becomes in some respects a sort of gift
to them- to be held on the feudal tenure of zeal to the new
establishment. This project is evidently to let in a body of
purchasers without money. The consequence will be that these
purchasers, or rather grantees, will pay, not only from the rents as
they accrue, which might as well be received by the state, but from
the spoil of the materials of buildings, from waste in woods, and from
whatever money, by hands habituated to the gripings of usury, they can
wring from the miserable peasant. He is to be delivered over to the
mercenary and arbitrary discretion of men who will be stimulated to
every species of extortion by the growing demands on the growing
profits of an estate held under the precarious settlement of a new
    When all the frauds, impostures, violences, rapines, burnings,
murders, confiscations, compulsory paper currencies, and every
description of tyranny and cruelty employed to bring about and to
uphold this Revolution have their natural effect, that is, to shock
the moral sentiments of all virtuous and sober minds, the abettors
of this philosophic system immediately strain their throats in a
declamation against the old monarchical government of France. When
they have rendered that deposed power sufficiently black, they then
proceed in argument as if all those who disapprove of their new abuses
must of course be partisans of the old, that those who reprobate their
crude and violent schemes of liberty ought to be treated as
advocates for servitude. I admit that their necessities do compel them
to this base and contemptible fraud. Nothing can reconcile men to
their proceedings and projects but the supposition that there is no
third option between them and some tyranny as odious as can be
furnished by the records of history, or by the invention of poets.
This prattling of theirs hardly deserves the name of sophistry. It
is nothing but plain impudence. Have these gentlemen never heard, in
the whole circle of the worlds of theory and practice, of anything
between the despotism of the monarch and the despotism of the
multitude? Have they never heard of a monarchy directed by laws,
controlled and balanced by the great hereditary wealth and
hereditary dignity of a nation, and both again controlled by a
judicious check from the reason and feeling of the people at large
acting by a suitable and permanent organ? Is it then impossible that a
man may be found who, without criminal ill intention or pitiable
absurdity, shall prefer such a mixed and tempered government to either
of the extremes, and who may repute that nation to be destitute of all
wisdom and of all virtue which, having in its choice to obtain such
a government with ease, or rather to confirm it when actually
possessed, thought proper to commit a thousand crimes and to subject
their country to a thousand evils in order to avoid it? Is it then a
truth so universally acknowledged that a pure democracy is the only
tolerable form into which human society can be thrown, that a man is
not permitted to hesitate about its merits without the suspicion of
being a friend to tyranny, that is, of being a foe to mankind?
    I do not know under what description to class the present ruling
authority in France. It affects to be a pure democracy, though I think
it in a direct train of becoming shortly a mischievous and ignoble
oligarchy. But for the present I admit it to be a contrivance of the
nature and effect of what it pretends to. I reprobate no form of
government merely upon abstract principles. There may be situations in
which the purely democratic form will become necessary. There may be
some (very few, and very particularly circumstanced) where it would be
clearly desirable. This I do not take to be the case of France or of
any other great country. Until now, we have seen no examples of
considerable democracies. The ancients were better acquainted with
them. Not being wholly unread in the authors who had seen the most
of those constitutions, and who best understood them, I cannot help
concurring with their opinion that an absolute democracy, no more than
absolute monarchy, is to be reckoned among the legitimate forms of
government. They think it rather the corruption and degeneracy than
the sound constitution of a republic. If I recollect rightly,
Aristotle observes that a democracy has many striking points of
resemblance with a tyranny.* Of this I am certain, that in a democracy
the majority of the citizens is capable of exercising the most cruel
oppressions upon the minority whenever strong divisions prevail in
that kind of polity, as they often must; and that oppression of the
minority will extend to far greater numbers and will be carried on
with much greater fury than can almost ever be apprehended from the
dominion of a single scepter. In such a popular persecution,
individual sufferers are in a much more deplorable condition than in
any other. Under a cruel prince they have the balmy compassion of
mankind to assuage the smart of their wounds; they have the plaudits
of the people to animate their generous constancy under their
sufferings; but those who are subjected to wrong under multitudes
are deprived of all external consolation. They seem deserted by
mankind, overpowered by a conspiracy of their whole species.
    * When I wrote this I quoted from memory, after many years had
elapsed from my reading the passage. A learned friend has found it,
    To ethos to auto, kai ampho despotika ton beltionon, kai ta
psephismata, osper ekei ta epitagmata kai o demagogos kai o kolax,
oi autoi kai analogoi kai malista ekateroi par ekaterois ischuousin,
oi men kolakes para turannois, oi de demagogoi para tois demois tois
    "The ethical character is the same; both exercise despotism over
the better class of citizens; and decrees are in the one, what
ordinances and arrets are in the other: the demagogue, too, and the
court favorite are not unfrequently the same identical men, and always
bear a close analogy; and these have the principal power, each in
their respective forms of government, favorites with the absolute
monarch, and demagogues with a people such as I have described".
    BUT ADMITTING DEMOCRACY not to have that inevitable tendency to
party tyranny, which I suppose it to have, and admitting it to possess
as much good in it when unmixed as I am sure it possesses when
compounded with other forms, does monarchy, on its part, contain
nothing at all to recommend it? I do not often quote Bolingbroke,
nor have his works in general left any permanent impression on my
mind. He is a presumptuous and a superficial writer. But he has one
observation which, in my opinion, is not without depth and solidity.
He says that he prefers a monarchy to other governments because you
can better ingraft any description of republic on a monarchy than
anything of monarchy upon the republican forms. I think him
perfectly in the right. The fact is so historically, and it agrees
    I know how easy a topic it is to dwell on the faults of departed
greatness. By a revolution in the state, the fawning sycophant of
yesterday is converted into the austere critic of the present hour.
But steady, independent minds, when they have an object of so
serious a concern to mankind as government under their
contemplation, will disdain to assume the part of satirists and
declaimers. They will judge of human institutions as they do of
human characters. They will sort out the good from the evil, which
is mixed in mortal institutions, as it is in mortal men.
    YOUR government in France, though usually, and I think justly,
reputed the best of the unqualified or ill-qualified monarchies, was
still full of abuses. These abuses accumulated in a length of time, as
they must accumulate in every monarchy not under the constant
inspection of a popular representative. I am no stranger to the faults
and defects of the subverted government of France, and I think I am
not inclined by nature or policy to make a panegyric upon anything
which is a just and natural object of censure. But the question is not
now of the vices of that monarchy, but of its existence. Is it,
then, true that the French government was such as to be incapable or
undeserving of reform, so that it was of absolute necessity that the
whole fabric should be at once pulled down and the area cleared for
the erection of a theoretic, experimental edifice in its place? All
France was of a different opinion in the beginning of the year 1789.
The instructions to the representatives to the States-General, from
every district in that kingdom, were filled with projects for the
reformation of that government without the remotest suggestion of a
design to destroy it. Had such a design been even insinuated, I
believe there would have been but one voice, and that voice for
rejecting it with scorn and horror. Men have been sometimes led by
degrees, sometimes hurried, into things of which, if they could have
seen the whole together, they never would have permitted the most
remote approach. When those instructions were given, there was no
question but that abuses existed, and that they demanded a reform; nor
is there now. In the interval between the instructions and the
revolution things changed their shape; and in consequence of that
change, the true question at present is, Whether those who would
have reformed or those who have destroyed are in the right?
    To hear some men speak of the late monarchy of France, you would
imagine that they were talking of Persia bleeding under the
ferocious sword of Tahmas Kouli Khan, or at least describing the
barbarous anarchic despotism of Turkey, where the finest countries
in the most genial climates in the world are wasted by peace more than
any countries have been worried by war, where arts are unknown,
where manufactures languish, where science is extinguished, where
agriculture decays, where the human race itself melts away and
perishes under the eye of the observer. Was this the case of France? I
have no way of determining the question but by reference to facts.
Facts do not support this resemblance. Along with much evil there is
some good in monarchy itself, and some corrective to its evil from
religion, from laws, from manners, from opinions the French monarchy
must have received, which rendered it (though by no means a free,
and therefore by no means a good, constitution) a despotism rather
    AMONG the standards upon which the effects of government on any
country are to be estimated, I must consider the state of its
population as not the least certain. No country in which population
flourishes and is in progressive improvement can be under a very
mischievous government. About sixty years ago, the Intendants of the
generalities of France made, with other matters, a report of the
population of their several districts. I have not the books, which are
very voluminous, by me, nor do I know where to procure them (I am
obliged to speak by memory, and therefore the less positively), but
I think the population of France was by them, even at that period,
estimated at twenty-two millions of souls. At the end of the last
century it had been generally calculated at eighteen. On either of
these estimations, France was not ill peopled. M. Necker, who is an
authority for his own time, at least equal to the Intendants for
theirs, reckons, and upon apparently sure principles, the people of
France in the year 1780 at twenty-four millions six hundred and
seventy thousand. But was this the probable ultimate term under the
old establishment? Dr. Price is of opinion that the growth of
population in France was by no means at its acme in that year. I
certainly defer to Dr. Price's authority a good deal more in these
speculations than I do in his general politics. This gentleman, taking
ground on M. Necker's data, is very confident that since the period of
that minister's calculation the French population has increased
rapidly- so rapidly that in the year 1789 he will not consent to
rate the people of that kingdom at a lower number than thirty
millions. After abating much (and much I think ought to be abated)
from the sanguine calculation of Dr. Price, I have no doubt that the
population of France did increase considerably during this later
period; but supposing that it increased to nothing more than will be
sufficient to complete the twenty-four millions six hundred and
seventy thousand to twenty-five millions, still a population of
twenty-five millions, and that in an increasing progress, on a space
of about twenty-seven thousand square leagues is immense. It is, for
instance, a good deal more than the proportionable population of
this island, or even than that of England, the best peopled part of
    It is not universally true that France is a fertile country.
Considerable tracts of it are barren and labor under other natural
disadvantages. In the portions of that territory where things are more
favorable, as far as I am able to discover, the numbers of the
people correspond to the indulgence of nature.* The Generality of
Lisle (this I admit is the strongest example) upon an extent of four
hundred and four leagues and a half, about ten years ago, contained
seven hundred and thirty-four thousand six hundred souls, which is one
thousand seven hundred and seventy-two inhabitants to each square
league. The middle term for the rest of France is about nine hundred
    * De l'Administration des Finances de la France, par Mons. Necker,
    I do not attribute this population to the deposed government,
because I do not like to compliment the contrivances of men with
what is due in a great degree to the bounty of Providence. But that
decried government could not have obstructed, most probably it
favored, the operation of those causes (whatever they were), whether
of nature in the soil or habits of industry among the people, which
has produced so large a number of the species throughout that whole
kingdom and exhibited in some particular places such prodigies of
population. I never will suppose that fabric of a state to be the
worst of all political institutions which, by experience, is found
to contain a principle favorable (however latent it may be) to the
    The wealth of a country is another, and no contemptible,
standard by which we may judge whether, on the whole, a government
be protecting or destructive. France far exceeds England in the
multitude of her people, but I apprehend that her comparative wealth
is much inferior to ours, that it is not so equal in the distribution,
nor so ready in the circulation. I believe the difference in the
form of the two governments to be amongst the causes of this advantage
on the side of England. I speak of England, not of the whole British
dominions, which, if compared with those of France, will, in some
degree, weaken the comparative rate of wealth upon our side. But
that wealth, which will not endure a comparison with the riches of
England, may constitute a very respectable degree of opulence. M.
Necker's book, published in 1785,* contains an accurate and
interesting collection of facts relative to public economy and to
political arithmetic; and his speculations on the subject are in
general wise and liberal. In that work he gives an idea of the state
of France very remote from the portrait of a country whose
government was a perfect grievance, an absolute evil, admitting no
cure but through the violent and uncertain remedy of a total
revolution. He affirms that from the year 1726 to the year 1784
there was coined at the mint of France, in the species of gold and
silver, to the amount of about one hundred millions of pounds
    * De l'administration des Finances de la France, par M. Necker.
    It is impossible that M. Necker should be mistaken in the amount
of the bullion which has been coined in the mint. It is a matter of
official record. The reasonings of this able financier, concerning the
quantity of gold and silver which remained for circulation, when he
wrote in 1785, that is, about four years before the deposition and
imprisonment of the French king, are not of equal certainty, but
they are laid on grounds so apparently solid that it is not easy to
refuse a considerable degree of assent to his calculation. He
calculates the numeraire, or what we call "specie", then actually
existing in France at about eighty-eight millions of the same
English money. A great accumulation of wealth for one country, large
as that country is! M. Necker was so far from considering this
influx of wealth as likely to cease, when he wrote in 1785, that he
presumes upon a future annual increase of two per cent upon the
money brought into France during the periods from which he computed.
    Some adequate cause must have originally introduced all the
money coined at its mint into that kingdom, and some cause as
operative must have kept at home, or returned into its bosom, such a
vast flood of treasure as M. Necker calculates to remain for
domestic circulation. Suppose any reasonable deductions from M.
Necker's computation, the remainder must still amount to an immense
sum. Causes thus powerful to acquire, and to retain, cannot be found
in discouraged industry, insecure property, and a positively
destructive government. Indeed, when I consider the face of the
kingdom of France, the multitude and opulence of her cities, the
useful magnificence of her spacious high roads and bridges, the
opportunity of her artificial canals and navigations opening the
conveniences of maritime communication through a solid continent of so
immense an extent; when I turn my eyes to the stupendous works of
her ports and harbors, and to her whole naval apparatus, whether for
war or trade; when I bring before my view the number of her
fortifications, constructed with so bold and masterly a skill and made
and maintained at so prodigious a charge, presenting an armed front
and impenetrable barrier to her enemies upon every side; when I
recollect how very small a part of that extensive region is without
cultivation, and to what complete perfection the culture of many of
the best productions of the earth have been brought in France; when
I reflect on the excellence of her manufactures and fabrics, second to
none but ours, and in some particulars not second; when I
contemplate the grand foundations of charity, public and private; when
I survey the state of all the arts that beautify and polish life; when
I reckon the men she has bred for extending her fame in war, her
able statesmen, the multitude of her profound lawyers and theologians,
her philosophers, her critics, her historians and antiquaries, her
poets and her orators, sacred and profane- I behold in all this
something which awes and commands the imagination, which checks the
mind on the brink of precipitate and indiscriminate censure, and which
demands that we should very seriously examine what and how great are
the latent vices that could authorize us at once to level so
spacious a fabric with the ground. I do not recognize in this view
of things the despotism of Turkey. Nor do I discern the character of a
government that has been, on the whole, so oppressive or so corrupt or
so negligent as to be utterly unfit for all reformation. I must
think such a government well deserved to have its excellence
heightened, its faults corrected, and its capacities improved into a
    Whoever has examined into the proceedings of that deposed
government for several years back cannot fail to have observed, amidst
the inconstancy and fluctuation natural to courts, an earnest endeavor
toward the prosperity and improvement of the country; he must admit
that it had long been employed, in some instances wholly to remove, in
many considerably to correct, the abusive practices and usages that
had prevailed in the state, and that even the unlimited power of the
sovereign over the persons of his subjects, inconsistent, as
undoubtedly it was, with law and liberty, had yet been every day
growing more mitigated in the exercise. So far from refusing itself to
reformation, that government was open, with a censurable degree of
facility, to all sorts of projects and projectors on the subject.
Rather too much countenance was given to the spirit of innovation,
which soon was turned against those who fostered it, and ended in
their ruin. It is but cold, and no very flattering, justice to that
fallen monarchy to say that, for many years, it trespassed more by
levity and want of judgment in several of its schemes than from any
defect in diligence or in public spirit. To compare the government
of France for the last fifteen or sixteen years with wise and
well-constituted establishments during that, or during any period,
is not to act with fairness. But if in point of prodigality in the
expenditure of money, or in point of rigor in the exercise of power,
it be compared with any of the former reigns, I believe candid
judges will give little credit to the good intentions of those who
dwell perpetually on the donations to favorites, or on the expenses of
the court, or on the horrors of the Bastille in the reign of Louis the
    * The world is obliged to M. de Calonne for the pains he has taken
to refute the scandalous exaggerations relative to some of the royal
expenses, and to detect the fallacious account given of pensions,
for the wicked purpose of provoking the populace to all sorts of
    WHETHER the system, if it deserves such a name, now built on the
ruins of that ancient monarchy will be able to give a better account
of the population and wealth of the country which it has taken under
its care, is a matter very doubtful. Instead of improving by the
change, I apprehend that a long series of years must be told before it
can recover in any degree the effects of this philosophic
revolution, and before the nation can be replaced on its former
footing. If Dr. Price should think fit, a few years hence, to favor us
with an estimate of the population of France, he will hardly be able
to make up his tale of thirty millions of souls, as computed in
1789, or the Assembly's computation of twenty-six millions of that
year, or even M. Necker's twenty-five millions in 1780. I hear that
there are considerable emigrations from France, and that many,
quitting that voluptuous climate and that seductive Circean liberty,
have taken refuge in the frozen regions, and under the British
    In the present disappearance of coin, no person could think it the
same country in which the present minister of the finances has been
able to discover fourscore millions sterling in specie. From its
general aspect one would conclude that it had been for some time
past under the special direction of the learned academicians of Laputa
and Balnibarbi.* Already the population of Paris has so declined
that M. Necker stated to the National Assembly the provision to be
made for its subsistence at a fifth less than what had formerly been
found requisite.*(2) It is said (and I have never heard it
contradicted) that a hundred thousand people are out of employment
in that city, though it is become the seat of the imprisoned court and
National Assembly. Nothing, I am credibly informed, can exceed the
shocking and disgusting spectacle of mendicancy displayed in that
capital. Indeed the votes of the National Assembly leave no doubt of
the fact. They have lately appointed a standing committee of
mendicancy. They are contriving at once a vigorous police on this
subject and, for the first time, the imposition of a tax to maintain
the poor, for whose present relief great sums appear on the face of
the public accounts of the year.*(3) In the meantime the leaders of
the legislative clubs and coffee-houses are intoxicated with
admiration at their own wisdom and ability. They speak with the most
sovereign contempt of the rest of the world. They tell the people,
to comfort them in the rags with which they have clothed them, that
they are a nation of philosophers; and sometimes by all the arts of
quackish parade, by show, tumult, and bustle, sometimes by the
alarms of plots and invasions, they attempt to drown the cries of
indigence and to divert the eyes of the observer from the ruin and
wretchedness of the state. A brave people will certainly prefer
liberty accompanied with a virtuous poverty to a depraved and
wealthy servitude. But before the price of comfort and opulence is
paid, one ought to be pretty sure it is real liberty which is
purchased, and that she is to be purchased at no other price. I
shall always, however, consider that liberty as very equivocal in
her appearance which has not wisdom and justice for her companions and
    * See Gulliver's Travels for the idea of countries governed by
    *(2) M. de Calonne states the falling off of the population of
Paris as far more considerable; and it may be so, since the period
Travaux de charite pour subvenir au       Livres        L      s.  d.
provinces.............................  3,866,920=    161,121  13   4
mendicite............................   1,671,417=     69,642   7   6
Primes pour l'importation de grains     5,671,907=    236,329   9   2
ont eu lieu........................... 39,871,790=  1,661,324  11   8
                      Total       Liv. 51,082,034= L2,128,418   1   8
    When I sent this book to the press, I entertained some doubt
concerning the nature and extent of the last article in the above
accounts, which is only under a general head, without any detail.
Since then I have seen M. de Calonne's work. I must think it a great
loss to me that I had not that advantage earlier. M. de Calonne thinks
this article to be on account of general subsistence; but as he is not
able to comprehend how so great a loss as upwards of L1,661,000
sterling could be sustained on the difference between the price and
the sale of grain, he seems to attribute this enormous head of
charge to secret expenses of the Revolution. I cannot say anything
positively on that subject. The reader is capable of judging, by the
aggregate of these immense charges, on the state and condition of
France; and the system of public economy adopted in that nation. These
articles of account produced no inquiry or discussion in the
    THE advocates for this Revolution, not satisfied with exaggerating
the vices of their ancient government, strike at the fame of their
country itself by painting almost all that could have attracted the
attention of strangers, I mean their nobility and their clergy, as
objects of horror. If this were only a libel, there had not been
much in it. But it has practical consequences. Had your nobility and
gentry, who formed the great body of your landed men and the whole
of your military officers, resembled those of Germany at the period
when the Hansetowns were necessitated to confederate against the
nobles in defense of their property; had they been like the Orsini and
Vitelli in Italy, who used to sally from their fortified dens to rob
the trader and traveller; had they been such as the Mamelukes in Egypt
or the Nayres on the coast of Malabar, I do admit that too critical an
inquiry might not be advisable into the means of freeing the world
from such a nuisance. The statues of Equity and Mercy might be
veiled for a moment. The tenderest minds, confounded with the dreadful
exigency in which morality submits to the suspension of its own
rules in favor of its own principles, might turn aside whilst fraud
and violence were accomplishing the destruction of a pretended
nobility which disgraced, whilst it persecuted, human nature. The
persons most abhorrent from blood, and treason, and arbitrary
confiscation might remain silent spectators of this civil war
    But did the privileged nobility who met under the king's precept
at Versailles, in 1789, or their constituents, deserve to be looked on
as the Nayres or Mamelukes of this age, or as the Orsini and Vitelli
of ancient times? If I had then asked the question I should have
passed for a madman. What have they since done that they were to be
driven into exile, that their persons should be hunted about, mangled,
and tortured, their families dispersed, their houses laid in ashes,
and that their order should be abolished and the memory of it, if
possible, extinguished by ordaining them to change the very names by
which they were usually known? Read their instructions to their
representatives. They breathe the spirit of liberty as warmly and they
recommend reformation as strongly as any other order. Their privileges
relative to contribution were voluntarily surrendered, as the king,
from the beginning, surrendered all pretense to a right of taxation.
Upon a free constitution there was but one opinion in France. The
absolute monarchy was at an end. It breathed its last, without a
groan, without struggle, without convulsion. All the struggle, all the
dissension arose afterwards upon the preference of a despotic
democracy to a government of reciprocal control. The triumph of the
victorious party was over the principles of a British constitution.
    I have observed the affectation which for many years past has
prevailed in Paris, even to a degree perfectly childish, of
idolizing the memory of your Henry the Fourth. If anything could put
one out of humor with that ornament to the kingly character, it
would be this overdone style of insidious panegyric. The persons who
have worked this engine the most busily are those who have ended their
panegyrics in dethroning his successor and descendant, a man as
good-natured, at the least, as Henry the Fourth, altogether as fond of
his people, and who has done infinitely more to correct the ancient
vices of the state than that great monarch did, or we are sure he ever
meant to do. Well it is for his panegyrists that they have not him
to deal with. For Henry of Navarre was a resolute, active, and politic
prince. He possessed, indeed, great humanity and mildness, but a
humanity and mildness that never stood in the way of his interests. He
never sought to be loved without putting himself first in a
condition to be feared. He used soft language with determined conduct.
He asserted and maintained his authority in the gross, and distributed
his acts of concession only in the detail. He spent the income of
his prerogative nobly, but he took care not to break in upon the
capital, never abandoning for a moment any of the claims which he made
under the fundamental laws, nor sparing to shed the blood of those who
opposed him, often in the field, sometimes upon the scaffold.
Because he knew how to make his virtues respected by the ungrateful,
he has merited the praises of those whom, if they had lived in his
time, he would have shut up in the Bastille and brought to
punishment along with the regicides whom he hanged after he had
    If these panegyrists are in earnest in their admiration of Henry
the Fourth, they must remember that they cannot think more highly of
him than he did of the noblesse of France, whose virtue, honor,
courage, patriotism, and loyalty were his constant theme.
    But the nobility of France are degenerated since the days of Henry
the Fourth. This is possible. But it is more than I can believe to
be true in any great degree. I do not pretend to know France as
correctly as some others, but I have endeavored through my whole
life to make myself acquainted with human nature, otherwise I should
be unfit to take even my humble part in the service of mankind. In
that study I could not pass by a vast portion of our nature as it
appeared modified in a country but twenty-four miles from the shore of
this island. On my best observation, compared with my best
inquiries, I found your nobility for the greater part composed of
men of high spirit and of a delicate sense of honor, both with
regard to themselves individually and with regard to their whole
corps, over whom they kept, beyond what is common in other
countries, a censorial eye. They were tolerably well bred, very
officious, humane, and hospitable; in their conversation frank and
open; with a good military tone, and reasonably tinctured with
literature, particularly of the authors in their own language. Many
had pretensions far above this description. I speak of those who
    As to their behavior to the inferior classes, they appeared to
me to comport themselves toward them with good nature and with
something more nearly approaching to familiarity than is generally
practiced with us in the intercourse between the higher and lower
ranks of life. To strike any person, even in the most abject
condition, was a thing in a manner unknown and would be highly
disgraceful. Instances of other ill-treatment of the humble part of
the community were rare; and as to attacks made upon the property or
the personal liberty of the commons, I never heard of any whatsoever
from them; nor, whilst the laws were in vigor under the ancient
government, would such tyranny in subjects have been permitted. As men
of landed estates, I had no fault to find with their conduct, though
much to reprehend and much to wish changed in many of the old tenures.
Where the letting of their land was by rent, I could not discover that
their agreements with their farmers were oppressive; nor when they
were in partnership with the farmer, as often was the case, have I
heard that they had taken the lion's share. The proportions seemed not
inequitable. There might be exceptions, but certainly they were
exceptions only. I have no reason to believe that in these respects
the landed noblesse of France were worse than the landed gentry of
this country, certainly in no respect more vexatious than the
landholders, not noble, of their own nation. In cities the nobility
had no manner of power, in the country very little. You know, Sir,
that much of the civil government, and the police in the most
essential parts, was not in the hands of that nobility which
presents itself first to our consideration. The revenue, the system
and collection of which were the most grievous parts of the French
government, was not administered by the men of the sword, nor were
they answerable for the vices of its principle or the vexations, where
    Denying, as I am well warranted to do, that the nobility had any
considerable share in the oppression of the people in cases in which
real oppression existed, I am ready to admit that they were not
without considerable faults and errors. A foolish imitation of the
worst part of the manners of England, which impaired their natural
character without substituting in its place what, perhaps, they
meant to copy, has certainly rendered them worse than formerly they
were. Habitual dissoluteness of manners, continued beyond the
pardonable period of life, was more common amongst them than it is
with us; and it reigned with the less hope of remedy, though
possibly with something of less mischief by being covered with more
exterior decorum. They countenanced too much that licentious
philosophy which has helped to bring on their ruin. There was
another error amongst them more fatal. Those of the commons who
approached to or exceeded many of the nobility in point of wealth were
not fully admitted to the rank and estimation which wealth, in
reason and good policy, ought to bestow in every country, though I
think not equally with that of other nobility. The two kinds of
aristocracy were too punctiliously kept asunder, less so, however,
    This separation, as I have already taken the liberty of suggesting
to you, I conceive to be one principal cause of the destruction of the
old nobility. The military, particularly, was too exclusively reserved
for men of family. But, after all, this was an error of opinion, which
a conflicting opinion would have rectified. A permanent assembly in
which the commons had their share of power would soon abolish whatever
was too invidious and insulting in these distinctions, and even the
faults in the morals of the nobility would have been probably
corrected by the greater varieties of occupation and pursuit to
which a constitution by orders would have given rise.
    All this violent cry against the nobility I take to be a mere work
of art. To be honored and even privileged by the laws, opinions, and
inveterate usages of our country, growing out of the prejudice of
ages, has nothing to provoke horror and indignation in any man. Even
to be too tenacious of those privileges is not absolutely a crime. The
strong struggle in every individual to preserve possession of what
he has found to belong to him and to distinguish him is one of the
securities against injustice and despotism implanted in our nature. It
operates as an instinct to secure property and to preserve communities
in a settled state. What is there to shock in this? Nobility is a
graceful ornament to the civil order. It is the Corinthian capital
of polished society. Omnes boni nobilitati semper favemus, was the
saying of a wise and good man. It is indeed one sign of a liberal
and benevolent mind to incline to it with some sort of partial
propensity. He feels no ennobling principle in his own heart who
wishes to level all the artificial institutions which have been
adopted for giving a body to opinion, and permanence to fugitive
esteem. It is a sour, malignant, envious disposition, without taste
for the reality or for any image or representation of virtue, that
sees with joy the unmerited fall of what had long flourished in
splendor and in honor. I do not like to see anything destroyed, any
void produced in society, any ruin on the face of the land. It was,
therefore, with no disappointment or dissatisfaction that my inquiries
and observations did not present to me any incorrigible vices in the
noblesse of France, or any abuse which could not be removed by a
reform very short of abolition. Your noblesse did not deserve
    IT WAS WITH THE SAME SATISFACTION I found that the result of my
inquiry concerning your clergy was not dissimilar. It is no soothing
news to my ears that great bodies of men are incurably corrupt. It
is not with much credulity I listen to any when they speak evil of
those whom they are going to plunder. I rather suspect that vices
are feigned or exaggerated when profit is looked for in their
punishment. An enemy is a bad witness; a robber is a worse. Vices
and abuses there were undoubtedly in that order, and must be. It was
an old establishment, and not frequently revised. But I saw no
crimes in the individuals that merited confiscation of their
substance, nor those cruel insults and degradations, and that
unnatural persecution which have been substituted in the place of
    If there had been any just cause for this new religious
persecution, the atheistic libellers, who act as trumpeters to animate
the populace to plunder, do not love anybody so much as not to dwell
with complacency on the vices of the existing clergy. This they have
not done. They find themselves obliged to rake into the histories of
former ages (which they have ransacked with a malignant and profligate
industry) for every instance of oppression and persecution which has
been made by that body or in its favor in order to justify, upon
very iniquitous, because very illogical, principles of retaliation,
their own persecutions and their own cruelties. After destroying all
other genealogies and family distinctions, they invent a sort of
pedigree of crimes. It is not very just to chastise men for the
offenses of their natural ancestors, but to take the fiction of
ancestry in a corporate succession as a ground for punishing men who
have no relation to guilty acts, except in names and general
descriptions, is a sort of refinement in injustice belonging to the
philosophy of this enlightened age. The Assembly punishes men, many,
if not most, of whom abhor the violent conduct of ecclesiastics in
former times as much as their present persecutors can do, and who
would be as loud and as strong in the expression of that sense, if
they were not well aware of the purposes for which all this
    Corporate bodies are immortal for the good of the members, but not
for their punishment. Nations themselves are such corporations. As
well might we in England think of waging inexpiable war upon all
Frenchmen for the evils which they have brought upon us in the several
periods of our mutual hostilities. You might, on your part, think
yourselves justified in falling upon all Englishmen on account of
the unparalleled calamities brought on the people of France by the
unjust invasions of our Henries and our Edwards. Indeed, we should
be mutually justified in this exterminatory war upon each other,
full as much as you are in the unprovoked persecution of your
present countrymen, on account of the conduct of men of the same
    We do not draw the moral lessons we might from history. On the
contrary, without care it may be used to vitiate our minds and to
destroy our happiness. In history a great volume is unrolled for our
instruction, drawing the materials of future wisdom from the past
errors and infirmities of mankind. It may, in the perversion, serve
for a magazine furnishing offensive and defensive weapons for
parties in church and state, and supplying the means of keeping
alive or reviving dissensions and animosities, and adding fuel to
civil fury. History consists for the greater part of the miseries
brought upon the world by pride, ambition, avarice, revenge, lust,
sedition, hypocrisy, ungoverned zeal, and all the train of
disorderly appetites which shake the public with the same
          The private state, and render life unsweet.
These vices are the causes of those storms. Religion, morals, laws,
prerogatives, privileges, liberties, rights of men are the pretexts.
The pretexts are always found in some specious appearance of a real
good. You would not secure men from tyranny and sedition by rooting
out of the mind the principles to which these fraudulent pretexts
apply? If you did, you would root out everything that is valuable in
the human breast. As these are the pretexts, so the ordinary actors
and instruments in great public evils are kings, priests, magistrates,
senates, parliaments, national assemblies, judges, and captains. You
would not cure the evil by resolving that there should be no more
monarchs, nor ministers of state, nor of the gospel; no interpreters
of law; no general officers; no public councils. You might change
the names. The things in some shape must remain. A certain quantum
of power must always exist in the community in some hands and under
some appellation. Wise men will apply their remedies to vices, not
to names; to the causes of evil which are permanent, not to the
occasional organs by which they act, and the transitory modes in which
they appear. Otherwise you will be wise historically, a fool in
practice. Seldom have two ages the same fashion in their pretexts
and the same modes of mischief. Wickedness is a little more inventive.
Whilst you are discussing fashion, the fashion is gone by. The very
same vice assumes a new body. The spirit transmigrates, and, far
from losing its principle of life by the change of its appearance,
it is renovated in its new organs with a fresh vigor of a juvenile
activity. It walks abroad, it continues its ravages, whilst you are
gibbeting the carcass or demolishing the tomb. You are terrifying
yourselves with ghosts and apparitions, whilst your house is the haunt
of robbers. It is thus with all those who, attending only to the shell
and husk of history, think they are waging war with intolerance,
pride, and cruelty, whilst, under color of abhorring the ill
principles of antiquated parties, they are authorizing and feeding the
same odious vices in different factions, and perhaps in worse.
    Your citizens of Paris formerly had lent themselves as the ready
instruments to slaughter the followers of Calvin, at the infamous
massacre of St. Bartholomew. What should we say to those who could
think of retaliating on the Parisians of this day the abominations and
horrors of that time? They are indeed brought to abhor that
massacre. Ferocious as they are, it is not difficult to make them
dislike it, because the politicians and fashionable teachers have no
interest in giving their passions exactly the same direction. Still,
however, they find it their interest to keep the same savage
dispositions alive. It was but the other day that they caused this
very massacre to be acted on the stage for the diversion of the
descendants of those who committed it. In this tragic farce they
produced the cardinal of Lorraine in his robes of function, ordering
general slaughter. Was this spectacle intended to make the Parisians
abhor persecution and loathe the effusion of blood?- No; it was to
teach them to persecute their own pastors; it was to excite them, by
raising a disgust and horror of their clergy, to an alacrity in
hunting down to destruction an order which, if it ought to exist at
all, ought to exist not only in safety, but in reverence. It was to
stimulate their cannibal appetites (which one would think had been
gorged sufficiently) by variety and seasoning; and to quicken them
to an alertness in new murders and massacres, if it should suit the
purpose of the Guises of the day. An assembly, in which sat a
multitude of priests and prelates, was obliged to suffer this
indignity at its door. The author was not sent to the galleys, nor the
players to the house of correction. Not long after this exhibition,
those players came forward to the Assembly to claim the rites of
that very religion which they had dared to expose, and to show their
prostituted faces in the senate, whilst the archbishop of Paris, whose
function was known to his people only by his prayers and benedictions,
and his wealth only by his alms, is forced to abandon his house and to
fly from his flock (as from ravenous wolves) because, truly, in the
sixteenth century, the cardinal of Lorraine was a rebel and a
    * This is on the supposition of the truth of the story, but he was
not in France at the time. One name serves as well as another.
    Such is the effect of the perversion of history by those who,
for the same nefarious purposes, have perverted every other part of
learning. But those who will stand upon that elevation of reason which
places centuries under our eye and brings things to the true point
of comparison, which obscures little names and effaces the colors of
little parties, and to which nothing can ascend but the spirit and
moral quality of human actions, will say to the teachers of the Palais
Royal: The cardinal of Lorraine was the murderer of the sixteenth
century, you have the glory of being the murderers in the
eighteenth, and this is the only difference between you. But history
in the nineteenth century, better understood and better employed,
will, I trust, teach a civilized posterity to abhor the misdeeds of
both these barbarous ages. It will teach future priests and
magistrates not to retaliate upon the speculative and inactive
atheists of future times the enormities committed by the present
practical zealots and furious fanatics of that wretched error,
which, in its quiescent state, is more than punished whenever it is
embraced. It will teach posterity not to make war upon either religion
or philosophy for the abuse which the hypocrites of both have made
of the two most valuable blessings conferred upon us by the bounty
of the universal Patron, who in all things eminently favors and
    If your clergy, or any clergy, should show themselves vicious
beyond the fair bounds allowed to human infirmity, and to those
professional faults which can hardly be separated from professional
virtues, though their vices never can countenance the exercise of
oppression, I do admit that they would naturally have the effect of
abating very much of our indignation against the tyrants who exceed
measure and justice in their punishment. I can allow in clergymen,
through all their divisions, some tenaciousness of their own
opinion, some overflowings of zeal for its propagation, some
predilection to their own state and office, some attachment to the
interests of their own corps, some preference to those who listen with
docility to their doctrines, beyond those who scorn and deride them. I
allow all this, because I am a man who has to deal with men, and who
would not, through a violence of toleration, run into the greatest
of all intolerance. I must bear with infirmities until they fester
    Undoubtedly, the natural progress of the passions, from frailty to
vice, ought to be prevented by a watchful eye and a firm hand. But
is it true that the body of your clergy had passed those limits of a
just allowance? From the general style of your late publications of
all sorts one would be led to believe that your clergy in France
were a sort of monsters, a horrible composition of superstition,
ignorance, sloth, fraud, avarice, and tyranny. But is this true? Is it
true that the lapse of time, the cessation of conflicting interests,
the woeful experience of the evils resulting from party rage have
had no sort of influence gradually to meliorate their minds? Is it
true that they were daily renewing invasions on the civil power,
troubling the domestic quiet of their country, and rendering the
operations of its government feeble and precarious? Is it true that
the clergy of our times have pressed down the laity with an iron
hand and were in all places lighting up the fires of a savage
persecution? Did they by every fraud endeavor to increase their
estates? Did they use to exceed the due demands on estates that were
their own? Or, rigidly screwing up right into wrong, did they
convert a legal claim into a vexatious extortion? When not possessed
of power, were they filled with the vices of those who envy it? Were
they inflamed with a violent, litigious spirit of controversy?
Goaded on with the ambition of intellectual sovereignty, were they
ready to fly in the face of all magistracy, to fire churches, to
massacre the priests of other descriptions, to pull down altars, and
to make their way over the ruins of subverted governments to an empire
of doctrine, sometimes flattering, sometimes forcing the consciences
of men from the jurisdiction of public institutions into a
submission of their personal authority, beginning with a claim of
    These, or some of these, were the vices objected, and not wholly
without foundation, to several of the churchmen of former times who
belonged to the two great parties which then divided and distracted
    If there was in France, as in other countries there visibly is,
a great abatement rather than any increase of these vices, instead
of loading the present clergy with the crimes of other men and the
odious character of other times, in common equity they ought to be
praised, encouraged, and supported in their departure from a spirit
which disgraced their predecessors, and for having assumed a temper of
mind and manners more suitable to their sacred function.
    When my occasions took me into France, toward the close of the
late reign, the clergy, under all their forms, engaged a
considerable part of my curiosity. So far from finding (except from
one set of men, not then very numerous, though very active) the
complaints and discontents against that body, which some
publications had given me reason to expect, I perceived little or no
public or private uneasiness on their account. On further examination,
I found the clergy, in general, persons of moderate minds and decorous
manners; I include the seculars and the regulars of both sexes. I
had not the good fortune to know a great many of the parochial clergy,
but in general I received a perfectly good account of their morals and
of their attention to their duties. With some of the higher clergy I
had a personal acquaintance, and of the rest in that class a very good
means of information. They were, almost all of them, persons of
noble birth. They resembled others of their own rank; and where
there was any difference, it was in their favor. They were more
fully educated than the military noblesse, so as by no means to
disgrace their profession by ignorance or by want of fitness for the
exercise of their authority. They seemed to me, beyond the clerical
character, liberal and open, with the hearts of gentlemen and men of
honor, neither insolent nor servile in their manners and conduct. They
seemed to me rather a superior class, a set of men amongst whom you
would not be surprised to find a Fenelon. I saw among the clergy in
Paris (many of the description are not to be met with anywhere) men of
great learning and candor; and I had reason to believe that this
description was not confined to Paris. What I found in other places
I know was accidental, and therefore to be presumed a fair example.
I spent a few days in a provincial town where, in the absence of the
bishop, I passed my evenings with three clergymen, his vicars-general,
persons who would have done honor to any church. They were all well
informed; two of them of deep, general, and extensive erudition,
ancient and modern, oriental and western, particularly in their own
profession. They had a more extensive knowledge of our English divines
than I expected, and they entered into the genius of those writers
with a critical accuracy. One of these gentlemen is since dead, the
Abbe Morangis. I pay this tribute, without reluctance, to the memory
of that noble, reverend, learned, and excellent person; and I should
do the same with equal cheerfulness to the merits of the others who, I
believe, are still living, if I did not fear to hurt those whom I am
    Some of these ecclesiastics of rank are by all titles persons
deserving of general respect. They are deserving of gratitude from
me and from many English. If this letter should ever come into their
hands, I hope they will believe there are those of our nation who feel
for their unmerited fall and for the cruel confiscation of their
fortunes with no common sensibility. What I say of them is a
testimony, as far as one feeble voice can go, which I owe to truth.
Whenever the question of this unnatural persecution is concerned, I
will pay it. No one shall prevent me from being just and grateful. The
time is fitted for the duty, and it is particularly becoming to show
our justice and gratitude when those who have deserved well of us
and of mankind are laboring under popular obloquy and the persecutions
    You had before your Revolution about a hundred and twenty bishops.
A few of them were men of eminent sanctity, and charity without limit.
When we talk of the heroic, of course we talk of rare virtue. I
believe the instances of eminent depravity may be as rare amongst them
as those of transcendent goodness. Examples of avarice and of
licentiousness may be picked out, I do not question it, by those who
delight in the investigation which leads to such discoveries. A man as
old as I am will not be astonished that several, in every description,
do not lead that perfect life of self-denial, with regard to wealth or
to pleasure, which is wished for by all, by some expected, but by none
exacted with more rigor than by those who are the most attentive to
their own interests, or the most indulgent to their own passions. When
I was in France, I am certain that the number of vicious prelates
was not great. Certain individuals among them, not distinguishable for
the regularity of their lives, made some amends for their want of
the severe virtues in their possession of the liberal, and were
endowed with qualities which made them useful in the church and state.
I am told that, with few exceptions, Louis the Sixteenth had been more
attentive to character, in his promotions to that rank, than his
immediate predecessor; and I believe (as some spirit of reform has
prevailed through the whole reign) that it may be true. But the
present ruling power has shown a disposition only to plunder the
church. It has punished all prelates, which is to favor the vicious,
at least in point of reputation. It has made a degrading pensionary
establishment to which no man of liberal ideas or liberal condition
will destine his children. It must settle into the lowest classes of
the people. As with you the inferior clergy are not numerous enough
for their duties; as these duties are, beyond measure, minute and
toilsome; as you have left no middle classes of clergy at their
ease, in future nothing of science or erudition can exist in the
Gallican church. To complete the project without the least attention
to the rights of patrons, the Assembly has provided in future an
elective clergy, an arrangement which will drive out of the clerical
profession all men of sobriety, all who can pretend to independence in
their function or their conduct, and which will throw the whole
direction of the public mind into the hands of a set of licentious,
bold, crafty, factious, flattering wretches, of such condition and
such habits of life as will make their contemptible pensions (in
comparison of which the stipend of an exciseman is lucrative and
honorable) an object of low and illiberal intrigue. Those officers
whom they still call bishops are to be elected to a provision
comparatively mean, through the same arts (that is, electioneering
arts), by men of all religious tenets that are known or can be
invented. The new lawgivers have not ascertained anything whatsoever
concerning their qualifications relative either to doctrine or to
morals, no more than they have done with regard to the subordinate
clergy; nor does it appear but that both the higher and the lower may,
at their discretion, practice or preach any mode of religion or
irreligion that they please. I do not yet see what the jurisdiction of
bishops over their subordinates is to be, or whether they are to
    In short, Sir, it seems to me that this new ecclesiastical
establishment is intended only to be temporary and preparatory to
the utter abolition, under any of its forms, of the Christian
religion, whenever the minds of men are prepared for this last
stroke against it, by the accomplishment of the plan for bringing
its ministers into universal contempt. They who will not believe
that the philosophical fanatics who guide in these matters have long
entertained such a design are utterly ignorant of their character
and proceedings. These enthusiasts do not scruple to avow their
opinion that a state can subsist without any religion better than with
one, and that they are able to supply the place of any good which
may be in it by a project of their own- namely, by a sort of
eduction they have imagined, founded in a knowledge of the physical
wants of men, progressively carried to an enlightened self-interest
which, when well understood, they tell us, will identify with an
interest more enlarged and public. The scheme of this education has
been long known. Of late they distinguish it (as they have got an
entirely new nomenclature of technical terms) by the name of a Civic
    I hope their partisans in England (to whom I rather attribute very
inconsiderate conduct than the ultimate object in this detestable
design) will succeed neither in the pillage of the ecclesiastics,
nor in the introduction of a principle of popular election to our
bishoprics and parochial cures. This, in the present condition of
the world, would be the last corruption of the church, the utter
ruin of the clerical character, the most dangerous shock that the
state ever received through a misunderstood arrangement of religion. I
know well enough that the bishoprics and cures under kingly and
seignioral patronage, as now they are in England, and as they have
been lately in France, are sometimes acquired by unworthy methods; but
the other mode of ecclesiastical canvass subjects them infinitely more
surely and more generally to all the evil arts of low ambition, which,
operating on and through greater numbers, will produce mischief in
    Those of you who have robbed the clergy think that they shall
easily reconcile their conduct to all Protestant nations, because
the clergy, whom they have thus plundered, degraded, and given over to
mockery and scorn, are of the Roman Catholic, that is, of their own
pretended persuasion. I have no doubt that some miserable bigots
will be found here, as well as elsewhere, who hate sects and parties
different from their own more than they love the substance of
religion, and who are more angry with those who differ from them in
their particular plans and systems than displeased with those who
attack the foundation of our common hope. These men will write and
speak on the subject in the manner that is to be expected from their
temper and character. Burnet says that when he was in France, in the
year 1683, "the method which carried over the men of the finest
parts to Popery was this- they brought themselves to doubt of the
whole Christian religion. When that was once done, it seemed a more
indifferent thing of what side or form they continued outwardly." If
this was then the ecclesiastical policy of France, it is what they
have since but too much reason to repent of. They preferred atheism to
a form of religion not agreeable to their ideas. They succeeded in
destroying that form; and atheism has succeeded in destroying them.
I can readily give credit to Burnet's story, because I have observed
too much of a similar spirit (for a little of it is "much too much")
amongst ourselves. The humor, however, is not general.
    THE teachers who reformed our religion in England bore no sort
of resemblance to your present reforming doctors in Paris. Perhaps
they were (like those whom they opposed) rather more than could be
wished under the influence of a party spirit, but they were more
sincere believers, men of the most fervent and exalted piety, ready to
die (as some of them did die) like true heroes in defense of their
particular ideas of Christianity, as they would with equal
fortitude, and more cheerfully, for that stock of general truth for
the branches of which they contended with their blood. These men would
have disavowed with horror those wretches who claimed a fellowship
with them upon no other titles than those of their having pillaged the
persons with whom they maintained controversies, and their having
despised the common religion for the purity of which they exerted
themselves with a zeal which unequivocally bespoke their highest
reverence for the substance of that system which they wished to
reform. Many of their descendants have retained the same zeal, but (as
less engaged in conflict) with more moderation. They do not forget
that justice and mercy are substantial parts of religion. Impious
men do not recommend themselves to their communion by iniquity and
cruelty toward any description of their fellow creatures.
    We hear these new teachers continually boasting of their spirit of
toleration. That those persons should tolerate all opinions, who think
none to be of estimation, is a matter of small merit. Equal neglect is
not impartial kindness. The species of benevolence which arises from
contempt is no true charity. There are in England abundance of men who
tolerate in the true spirit of toleration. They think the dogmas of
religion, though in different degrees, are all of moment, and that
amongst them there is, as amongst all things of value, a just ground
of preference. They favor, therefore, and they tolerate. They
tolerate, not because they despise opinions, but because they
respect justice. They would reverently and affectionately protect
all religions because they love and venerate the great principle
upon which they all agree, and the great object to which they are
all directed. They begin more and more plainly to discern that we have
all a common cause, as against a common enemy. They will not be so
misled by the spirit of faction as not to distinguish what is done
in favor of their subdivision from those acts of hostility which,
through some particular description, are aimed at the whole corps,
in which they themselves, under another denomination, are included. It
is impossible for me to say what may be the character of every
description of men amongst us. But I speak for the greater part; and
for them, I must tell you that sacrilege is no part of their
doctrine of good works; that, so far from calling you into their
fellowship on such title, if your professors are admitted to their
communion, they must carefully conceal their doctrine of the
lawfulness of the prescription of innocent men; and that they must
make restitution of all stolen goods whatsoever. Till then they are
    You may suppose that we do not approve your confiscation of the
revenues of bishops, and deans, and chapters, and parochial clergy
possessing independent estates arising from land, because we have
the same sort of establishment in England. That objection, you will
say, cannot hold as to the confiscation of the goods of monks and nuns
and the abolition of their order. It is true that this particular part
of your general confiscation does not affect England, as a precedent
in point; but the reason implies, and it goes a great way. The Long
Parliament confiscated the lands of deans and chapters in England on
the same ideas upon which your Assembly set to sale the lands of the
monastic orders. But it is in the principle of injustice that the
danger lies, and not in the description of persons on whom it is first
exercised. I see, in a country very near us, a course of policy
pursued which sets justice, the common concern of mankind, at
defiance. With the National Assembly of France possession is
nothing, law and usage are nothing. I see the National Assembly openly
reprobate the doctrine of prescription, which* one of the greatest
of their own lawyers tells us, with great truth, is a part of the
law of nature. He tells us that the positive ascertainment of its
limits, and its security from invasion, were among the causes for
which civil society itself has been instituted. If prescription be
once shaken, no species of property is secure when it once becomes
an object large enough to tempt the cupidity of indigent power. I
see a practice perfectly correspondent to their contempt of this great
fundamental part of natural law. I see the confiscators begin with
bishops and chapters, and monasteries, but I do not see them end
there. I see the princes of the blood, who by the oldest usages of
that kingdom held large landed estates, (hardly with the compliment of
a debate) deprived of their possessions and, in lieu of their
stable, independent property, reduced to the hope of some
precarious, charitable pension at the pleasure of an assembly which of
course will pay little regard to the rights of pensioners at
pleasure when it despises those of legal proprietors. Flushed with the
insolence of their first inglorious victories, and pressed by the
distresses caused by their lust of unhallowed lucre, disappointed
but not discouraged, they have at length ventured completely to
subvert all property of all descriptions throughout the extent of a
great kingdom. They have compelled all men, in all transactions of
commerce, in the disposal of lands, in civil dealing, and through
the whole communion of life, to accept as perfect payment and good and
lawful tender the symbols of their speculations on a projected sale of
their plunder. What vestiges of liberty or property have they left?
The tenant right of a cabbage garden, a year's interest in a hovel,
the goodwill of an alehouse or a baker's shop, the very shadow of a
constructive property, are more ceremoniously treated in our
parliament than with you the oldest and most valuable landed
possessions, in the hands of the most respectable personages, or
than the whole body of the monied and commercial interest of your
country. We entertain a high opinion of the legislative authority, but
we have never dreamt that parliaments had any right whatever to
violate property, to overrule prescription, or to force a currency
of their own fiction in the place of that which is real and recognized
by the law of nations. But you, who began with refusing to submit to
the most moderate restraints, have ended by establishing an unheard-of
despotism. I find the ground upon which your confiscators go is
this: that, indeed, their proceedings could not be supported in a
court of justice, but that the rules of prescription cannot bind a
legislative assembly.*(2) So that this legislative assembly of a
free nation sits, not for the security, but for the destruction, of
property, and not of property only, but of every rule and maxim
which can give it stability, and of those instruments which can
    *(2) Speech of Mr. Camus, published by order of the National
    When the Anabaptists of Munster, in the sixteenth century, had
filled Germany with confusion by their system of leveling and their
wild opinions concerning property, to what country in Europe did not
the progress of their fury furnish just cause of alarm? Of all things,
wisdom is the most terrified with epidemical fanaticism, because of
all enemies it is that against which she is the least able to
furnish any kind of resource. We cannot be ignorant of the spirit of
atheistical fanaticism that is inspired by a multitude of writings
dispersed with incredible assiduity and expense, and by sermons
delivered in all the streets and places of public resort in Paris.
These writings and sermons have filled the populace with a black and
savage atrocity of mind, which supersedes in them the common
feelings of nature as well as all sentiments of morality and religion,
insomuch that these wretches are induced to bear with a sullen
patience the intolerable distresses brought upon them by the violent
convulsions and permutations that have been made in property.* The
spirit of proselytism attends this spirit of fanaticism. They have
societies to cabal and correspond at home and abroad for the
propagation of their tenets. The republic of Berne, one of the
happiest, the most prosperous, and the best governed countries upon
earth, is one of the great objects at the destruction of which they
aim. I am told they have in some measure succeeded in sowing there the
seeds of discontent. They are busy throughout Germany. Spain and Italy
have not been untried. England is not left out of the comprehensive
scheme of their malignant charity; and in England we find those who
stretch out their arms to them, who recommend their example from
more than one pulpit, and who choose in more than one periodical
meeting publicly to correspond with them, to applaud them, and to hold
them up as objects for imitation; who receive from them tokens of
confraternity, and standards consecrated amidst their rites and
mysteries;*(2) who suggest to them leagues of perpetual amity, at
the very time when the power to which our constitution has exclusively
delegated the federative capacity of this kingdom may find it
    * Whether the following description is strictly true, I know
not; but it is what the publishers would have pass for true in order
to animate others. In a letter from Toul, given in one of their
papers, is the following passage concerning the people of that
district: "Dans la Revolution actuelle, ils ont resiste a toutes les
seductions du bigotisme, aux persecutions, et aux tracasseries des
ennemis de la Revolution. Oubliant leurs plus grands interets pour
rendre hommage aux vues d'ordre general qui ont determine
l'Assemblee Nationale, ils voient, sans se plaindre, supprimer cette
foule detablissemens ecclesiastiques par lesquels ils subsistoient; et
meme, en perdant leur siege episcopal, la seule de toutes ces
ressources qui pouvoit, ou plutot qui devoit, en toute equite, leur
etre conservee; condamnes a la plus effrayante misere, sans avoir
ete ni pu etre entendus, ils ne murmurent point, ils restent fideles
aux principes du plus pur patriotisme; ils sont encore prets a
verser leur sang pour le maintien de la Constitution, qui va reduire
leur ville a la plus deplorable nullite." These people are not
supposed to have endured those sufferings and injustices in a struggle
for liberty, for the same account states truly that they had been
always free; their patience in beggary and ruin, and their
suffering, without remonstrance, the most flagrant and confessed
injustice, if strictly true, can be nothing but the effect of this
dire fanaticism. A great multitude all over France is in the same
    *(2) See the proceedings of the confederation at Nantz.
    It is not the confiscation of our church property from this
example in France that I dread, though I think this would be no
trifling evil. The great source of my solicitude is, lest it should
ever be considered in England as the policy of a state to seek a
resource in confiscations of any kind, or that any one description
of citizens should be brought to regard any of the others as their
proper prey.* Nations are wading deeper and deeper into an ocean of
boundless debt. Public debts, which at first were a security to
governments by interesting many in the public tranquillity, are likely
in their excess to become the means of their subversion. If
governments provide for these debts by heavy impositions, they
perish by becoming odious to the people. If they do not provide for
them, they will be undone by the efforts of the most dangerous of
all parties- I mean an extensive, discontented monied interest,
injured and not destroyed. The men who compose this interest look
for their security, in the first instance, to the fidelity of
government; in the second, to its power. If they find the old
governments effete, worn out, and with their springs relaxed, so as
not to be of sufficient vigor for their purposes, they may seek new
ones that shall be possessed of more energy; and this energy will be
derived, not from an acquisition of resources, but from a contempt
of justice. Revolutions are favorable to confiscation; and it is
impossible to know under what obnoxious names the next confiscations
will be authorized. I am sure that the principles predominant in
France extend to very many persons and descriptions of persons, in all
countries, who think their innoxious indolence their security. This
kind of innocence in proprietors may be argued into inutility; and
inutility into an unfitness for their estates. Many parts of Europe
are in open disorder. In many others there is a hollow murmuring under
ground; a confused movement is felt that threatens a general
earthquake in the political world. Already confederacies and
correspondencies of the most extraordinary nature are forming in
several countries.*(2) In such a state of things we ought to hold
ourselves upon our guard. In all mutations (if mutations must be)
the circumstance which will serve most to blunt the edge of their
mischief and to promote what good may be in them is that they should
find us with our minds tenacious of justice and tender of property.
    * "Si plures sunt ii quibus improbe datum est, quam illi quibus
injuste ademptum est, idcirco plus etiam valent? Non enim numero
haec judicantur sed pondere. Quam autem habet aequitatem, ut agrum
multis annis, aut etiam saeculis ante possessum, qui nullum habuit
habeat; qui autem habuit amittat? Ac, propter hoc injuriae genus,
Lacedaemonii Lysandrum Ephorum expulerunt: Agin regem (quod nunquam
antea apud eos acciderat) necaverunt: exque eo tempore tantae
discordiae secutae sunt, ut et tyranni existerint, et optimates
exterminarentur, et preclarissime constituta respublica dilaberetur.
Nec vero solum ipsa cecidit, sed etiam reliquam Graeciam evertit
contagionibus malorum, quae a Lacedaemoniis profectae manarunt
latius".- After speaking of the conduct of the model of true patriots,
Aratus of Sicyon, which was in a very different spirit, he says,
"Sic par est agere cum civibus; non ut bis jam vidimus, hastam in foro
ponere et bona civium voci subjicere praeconis. At ille Graecus (id
quod fuit sapientis et praestantis viri) omnibus consulendum esse
putavit: eaque est summa ratio et sapientia boni civis, commoda civium
non divellere, sed omnes eadem aequitate continere." Cic. Off. 1. 2.
    *(2) See two books entitled, Einige Originalschriften des
Illuminatenordens.- System und Folgen des Illuminatenordens.
    But it will be argued that this confiscation in France ought not
to alarm other nations. They say it is not made from wanton
rapacity, that it is a great measure of national policy adopted to
remove an extensive, inveterate, superstitious mischief. It is with
the greatest difficulty that I am able to separate policy from
justice. Justice itself is the great standing policy of civil society,
and any eminent departure from it, under any circumstances, lies under
    When men are encouraged to go into a certain mode of life by the
existing laws, and protected in that mode as in a lawful occupation;
when they have accommodated all their ideas and all their habits to
it; when the law had long made their adherence to its rules a ground
of reputation, and their departure from them a ground of disgrace
and even of penalty- I am sure it is unjust in legislature, by an
arbitrary act, to offer a sudden violence to their minds and their
feelings, forcibly to degrade them from their state and condition
and to stigmatize with shame and infamy that character and those
customs which before had been made the measure of their happiness
and honor. If to this be added an expulsion from their habitations and
a confiscation of all their goods, I am not sagacious enough to
discover how this despotic sport, made of the feelings, consciences,
prejudices, and properties of men, can be discriminated from the
    If the injustice of the course pursued in France be clear, the
policy of the measure, that is, the public benefit to be expected from
it, ought to be at least as evident and at least as important. To a
man who acts under the influence of no passion, who has nothing in
view in his projects but the public good, a great difference will
immediately strike him between what policy would dictate on the
original introduction of such institutions and on a question of
their total abolition, where they have cast their roots wide and deep,
and where, by long habit, things more valuable than themselves are
so adapted to them, and in a manner interwoven with them, that the one
cannot be destroyed without notably impairing the other. He might be
embarrassed if the case were really such as sophisters represent it in
their paltry style of debating. But in this, as in most questions of
state, there is a middle. There is something else than the mere
alternative of absolute destruction or unreformed existence. Spartam
nactus es; hanc exorna. This is, in my opinion, a rule of profound
sense and ought never to depart from the mind of an honest reformer. I
cannot conceive how any man can have brought himself to that pitch
of presumption to consider his country as nothing but carte blanche-
upon which he may scribble whatever he pleases. A man full of warm,
speculative benevolence may wish his society otherwise constituted
than he finds it, but a good patriot and a true politician always
considers how he shall make the most of the existing materials of
his country. A disposition to preserve and an ability to improve,
taken together, would be my standard of a statesman. Everything else
is vulgar in the conception, perilous in the execution.
    There are moments in the fortune of states when particular men are
called to make improvements by great mental exertion. In those
moments, even when they seem to enjoy the confidence of their prince
and country, and to be invested with full authority, they have not
always apt instruments. A politician, to do great things, looks for
a power what our workmen call a purchase; and if he finds that
power, in politics as in mechanics, he cannot be at a loss to apply
it. In the monastic institutions, in my opinion, was found a great
power for the mechanism of politic benevolence. There were revenues
with a public direction; there were men wholly set apart and dedicated
to public purposes, without any other than public ties and public
principles; men without the possibility of converting the estate of
the community into a private fortune; men denied to self-interests,
whose avarice is for some community; men to whom personal poverty is
honor, and implicit obedience stands in the place of freedom. In
vain shall a man look to the possibility of making such things when he
wants them. The winds blow as they list. These institutions are the
products of enthusiasm; they are the instruments of wisdom. Wisdom
cannot create materials; they are the gifts of nature or of chance;
her pride is in the use. The perennial existence of bodies corporate
and their fortunes are things particularly suited to a man who has
long views; who meditates designs that require time in fashioning, and
which propose duration when they are accomplished. He is not deserving
to rank high, or even to be mentioned in the order of great statesmen,
who, having obtained the command and direction of such a power as
existed in the wealth, the discipline, and the habits of such
corporations, as those which you have rashly destroyed, cannot find
any way of converting it to the great and lasting benefit of his
country. On the view of this subject, a thousand uses suggest
themselves to a contriving mind. To destroy any power growing wild
from the rank productive force of the human mind is almost tantamount,
in the moral world, to the destruction of the apparently active
properties of bodies in the material. It would be like the attempt
to destroy (if it were in our competence to destroy) the expansive
force of fixed air in nitre, or the power of steam, or of electricity,
or of magnetism. These energies always existed in nature, and they
were always discernible. They seemed, some of them unserviceable, some
noxious, some no better than a sport to children, until
contemplative ability, combining with practic skill, tamed their
wild nature, subdued them to use, and rendered them at once the most
powerful and the most tractable agents in subservience to the great
views and designs of men. Did fifty thousand persons whose mental
and whose bodily labor you might direct, and so many hundred
thousand a year of a revenue which was neither lazy nor superstitious,
appear too big for your abilities to wield? Had you no way of using
them but by converting monks into pensioners? Had you no way of
turning the revenue to account but through the improvident resource of
a spendthrift sale? If you were thus destitute of mental funds, the
proceeding is in its natural course. Your politicians do not
understand their trade; and therefore they sell their tools.
    But the institutions savor of superstition in their very
principle, and they nourish it by a permanent and standing
influence. This I do not mean to dispute, but this ought not to hinder
you from deriving from superstition itself any resources which may
thence be furnished for the public advantage. You derive benefits from
many dispositions and many passions of the human mind which are of
as doubtful a color, in the moral eye, as superstition itself. It
was your business to correct and mitigate everything which was noxious
in this passion, as in all the passions. But is superstition the
greatest of all possible vices? In its possible excess I think it
becomes a very great evil. It is, however, a moral subject and, of
course, admits of all degrees and all modifications. Superstition is
the religion of feeble minds; and they must be tolerated in an
intermixture of it, in some trifling or some enthusiastic shape or
other, else you will deprive weak minds of a resource found
necessary to the strongest. The body of all true religion consists, to
be sure, in obedience to the will of the Sovereign of the world, in
a confidence in his declarations, and in imitation of his perfections.
The rest is our own. It may be prejudicial to the great end; it may be
auxiliary. Wise men, who as such are not admirers (not admirers at
least of the Munera Terrae), are not violently attached to these
things, nor do they violently hate them. Wisdom is not the most severe
corrector of folly. They are the rival follies which mutually wage
so unrelenting a war, and which make so cruel a use of their
advantages as they can happen to engage the immoderate vulgar, on
the one side or the other, in their quarrels. Prudence would be
neuter, but if, in the contention between fond attachment and fierce
antipathy concerning things in their nature not made to produce such
heats, a prudent man were obliged to make a choice of what errors
and excesses of enthusiasm he would condemn or bear, perhaps he
would think the superstition which builds to be more tolerable than
that which demolishes; that which adorns a country, than that which
deforms it; that which endows, than that which plunders; that which
disposes to mistaken beneficence, than that which stimulates to real
injustice; that which leads a man to refuse to himself lawful
pleasures, than that which snatches from others the scanty subsistence
of their self-denial. Such, I think, is very nearly the state of the
question between the ancient founders of monkish superstition and
the superstition of the pretended philosophers of the hour.
    For the present I postpone all consideration of the supposed
public profit of the sale, which however I conceive to be perfectly
delusive. I shall here only consider it as a transfer of property.
On the policy of that transfer I shall trouble you with a few
    In every prosperous community something more is produced than goes
to the immediate support of the producer. This surplus forms the
income of the landed capitalist. It will be spent by a proprietor
who does not labor. But this idleness is itself the spring of labor;
this repose the spur to industry. The only concern of the state is
that the capital taken in rent from the land should be returned
again to the industry from whence it came, and that its expenditure
should be with the least possible detriment to the morals of those who
expend it, and to those of the people to whom it is returned.
    In all the views of receipt, expenditure, and personal employment,
a sober legislator would carefully compare the possessor whom he was
recommended to expel with the stranger who was proposed to fill his
place. Before the inconveniences are incurred which must attend all
violent revolutions in property through extensive confiscation, we
ought to have some rational assurance that the purchasers of the
confiscated property will be in a considerable degree more
laborious, more virtuous, more sober, less disposed to extort an
unreasonable proportion of the gains of the laborer, or to consume
on themselves a larger share than is fit for the measure of an
individual; or that they should be qualified to dispense the surplus
in a more steady and equal mode, so as to answer the purposes of a
politic expenditure, than the old possessors, call those possessors
bishops, or canons, or commendatory abbots, or monks, or what you
please. The monks are lazy. Be it so. Suppose them no otherwise
employed than by singing in the choir. They are as usefully employed
as those who neither sing nor say; as usefully even as those who
sing upon the stage. They are as usefully employed as if they worked
from dawn to dark in the innumerable servile, degrading, unseemly,
unmanly, and often most unwholesome and pestiferous occupations to
which by the social economy so many wretches are inevitably doomed. If
it were not generally pernicious to disturb the natural course of
things and to impede in any degree the great wheel of circulation
which is turned by the strangely-directed labor of these unhappy
people, I should be infinitely more inclined forcibly to rescue them
from their miserable industry than violently to disturb the tranquil
repose of monastic quietude. Humanity, and perhaps policy, might
better justify me in the one than in the other. It is a subject on
which I have often reflected, and never reflected without feeling from
it. I am sure that no consideration, except the necessity of
submitting to the yoke of luxury and the despotism of fancy, who in
their own imperious way will distribute the surplus product of the
soil, can justify the toleration of such trades and employments in a
well-regulated state. But for this purpose of distribution, it seems
to me that the idle expenses of monks are quite as well directed as
    When the advantages of the possession and of the project are on
a par, there is no motive for a change. But in the present case,
perhaps, they are not upon a par, and the difference is in favor of
the possession. It does not appear to me that the expenses of those
whom you are going to expel do in fact take a course so directly and
so generally leading to vitiate and degrade and render miserable those
through whom they pass as the expenses of those favorites whom you are
intruding into their houses. Why should the expenditure of a great
landed property, which is a dispersion of the surplus product of the
soil, appear intolerable to you or to me when it takes its course
through the accumulation of vast libraries, which are the history of
the force and weakness of the human mind; through great collections of
ancient records, medals, and coins, which attest and explain laws
and customs; through paintings and statues that, by imitating
nature, seem to extend the limits of creation; through grand monuments
of the dead, which continue the regards and connections of life beyond
the grave; through collections of the specimens of nature which become
a representative assembly of all the classes and families of the world
that by disposition facilitate and, by exciting curiosity, open the
avenues to science? If by great permanent establishments all these
objects of expense are better secured from the inconstant sport of
personal caprice and personal extravagance, are they worse than if the
same tastes prevailed in scattered individuals? Does not the sweat
of the mason and carpenter, who toil in order to partake of the
sweat of the peasant, flow as pleasantly and as salubriously in the
construction and repair of the majestic edifices of religion as in the
painted booths and sordid sties of vice and luxury; as honorably and
as profitably in repairing those sacred works which grow hoary with
innumerable years as on the momentary receptacles of transient
voluptuousness; in opera houses, and brothels, and gaming houses,
and clubhouses, and obelisks in the Champ de Mars? Is the surplus
product of the olive and the vine worse employed in the frugal
sustenance of persons whom the fictions of a pious imagination raise
to dignity by construing in the service of God, than in pampering
the innumerable multitude of those who are degraded by being made
useless domestics, subservient to the pride of man? Are the
decorations of temples an expenditure less worthy a wise man than
ribbons, and laces, and national cockades, and petit maisons, and
petit soupers, and all the innumerable fopperies and follies in
which opulence sports away the burden of its superfluity?
    We tolerate even these, not from love of them, but for fear of
worse. We tolerate them because property and liberty, to a degree,
require that toleration. But why proscribe the other, and surely, in
every point of view, the more laudable, use of estates? Why, through
the violation of all property, through an outrage upon every principle
of liberty, forcibly carry them from the better to the worse?
    This comparison between the new individuals and the old corps is
made upon a supposition that no reform could be made in the latter.
But in a question of reformation I always consider corporate bodies,
whether sole or consisting of many, to be much more susceptible of a
public direction by the power of the state, in the use of their
property and in the regulation of modes and habits of life in their
members, than private citizens ever can be or, perhaps, ought to be;
and this seems to me a very material consideration for those who
undertake anything which merits the name of a politic enterprise.-
    With regard to the estates possessed by bishops and canons and
commendatory abbots, I cannot find out for what reason some landed
estates may not be held otherwise than by inheritance. Can any
philosophic spoiler undertake to demonstrate the positive or the
comparative evil of having a certain, and that too a large, portion of
landed property passing in succession through persons whose title to
it is, always in theory and often in fact, an eminent degree of piety,
morals, and learning- a property which, by its destination, in their
turn, and on the score of merit, gives to the noblest families
renovation and support, to the lowest the means of dignity and
elevation; a property the tenure of which is the performance of some
duty (whatever value you may choose to set upon that duty), and the
character of whose proprietors demands, at least, an exterior
decorum and gravity of manners; who are to exercise a generous but
temperate hospitality; part of whose income they are to consider as
a trust for charity; and who, even when they fail in their trust, when
they slide from their character and degenerate into a mere common
secular nobleman or gentleman, are in no respect worse than those
who may succeed them in their forfeited possessions? Is it better that
estates should be held by those who have no duty than by those who
have one?- by those whose character and destination point to virtues
than by those who have no rule and direction in the expenditure of
their estates but their own will and appetite? Nor are these estates
held together in the character or with the evils supposed inherent
in mortmain. They pass from hand to hand with a more rapid circulation
than any other. No excess is good; and, therefore, too great a
proportion of landed property may be held officially for life; but
it does not seem to me of material injury to any commonwealth that
there should exist some estates that have a chance of being acquired
by other means than the previous acquisition of money.
    THIS LETTER HAS GROWN to a great length, though it is, indeed,
short with regard to the infinite extent of the subject. Various
avocations have from time to time called my mind from the subject. I
was not sorry to give myself leisure to observe whether, in the
proceedings of the National Assembly, I might not find reasons to
change or to qualify some of my first sentiments. Everything has
confirmed me more strongly in my first opinions. It was my original
purpose to take a view of the principles of the National Assembly with
regard to the great and fundamental establishments, and to compare the
whole of what you have substituted in the place of what you have
destroyed with the several members of our British constitution. But
this plan is of a greater extent than at first I computed, and I
find that you have little desire to take the advantage of any
examples. At present I must content myself with some remarks upon your
establishments, reserving for another time what I proposed to say
concerning the spirit of our British monarchy, aristocracy, and
    I have taken a view of what has been done by the governing power
in France. I have certainly spoken of it with freedom. Those whose
principle it is to despise the ancient, permanent sense of mankind and
to set up a scheme of society on new principles must naturally
expect that such of us who think better of the judgment of the human
race than of theirs should consider both them and their devices as men
and schemes upon their trial. They must take it for granted that we
attend much to their reason, but not at all to their authority. They
have not one of the great influencing prejudices of mankind in their
favor. They avow their hostility to opinion. Of course, they must
expect no support from that influence which, with every other
authority, they have deposed from the seat of its jurisdiction.
    I can never consider this Assembly as anything else than a
voluntary association of men who have availed themselves of
circumstances to seize upon the power of the state. They have not
the sanction and authority of the character under which they first
met. They have assumed another of a very different nature and have
completely altered and inverted all the relations in which they
originally stood. They do not hold the authority they exercise under
any constitutional law of the state. They have departed from the
instructions of the people by whom they were sent, which instructions,
as the Assembly did not act in virtue of any ancient usage or
settled law, were the sole source of their authority. The most
considerable of their acts have not been done by great majorities; and
in this sort of near divisions, which carry only the constructive
authority of the whole, strangers will consider reasons as well as
    If they had set up this new experimental government as a necessary
substitute for an expelled tyranny, mankind would anticipate the
time of prescription which, through long usage, mellows into
legality governments that were violent in their commencement. All
those who have affections which lead them to the conservation of civil
order would recognize, even in its cradle, the child as legitimate
which has been produced from those principles of cogent expediency
to which all just governments owe their birth, and on which they
justify their continuance. But they will be late and reluctant in
giving any sort of countenance to the operations of a power which
has derived its birth from no law and no necessity, but which, on
the contrary, has had its origin in those vices and sinister practices
by which the social union is often disturbed and sometimes
destroyed. This Assembly has hardly a year's prescription. We have
their own word for it that they have made a revolution. To make a
revolution is a measure which, prima fronte, requires an apology. To
make a revolution is to subvert the ancient state of our country;
and no common reasons are called for to justify so violent a
proceeding. The sense of mankind authorizes us to examine into the
mode of acquiring new power, and to criticize on the use that is
made of it, with less awe and reverence than that which is usually
    In obtaining and securing their power the Assembly proceeds upon
principles the most opposite to those which appear to direct them in
the use of it. An observation on this difference will let us into
the true spirit of their conduct. Everything which they have done,
or continue to do. in order to obtain and keep their power is by the
most common arts. They proceed exactly as their ancestors of
ambition have done before them.- Trace them through all their
artifices, frauds, and violences, you can find nothing at all that
is new. They follow precedents and examples with the punctilious
exactness of a pleader. They never depart an iota from the authentic
formulas of tyranny and usurpation. But in all the regulations
relative to the public good, the spirit has been the very reverse of
this. There they commit the whole to the mercy of untried
speculations; they abandon the dearest interests of the public to
those loose theories to which none of them would choose to trust the
slightest of his private concerns. They make this difference,
because in their desire of obtaining and securing power they are
thoroughly in earnest; there they travel in the beaten road. The
public interests, because about them they have no real solicitude,
they abandon wholly to chance; I say to chance, because their
schemes have nothing in experience to prove their tendency beneficial.
    We must always see with a pity not unmixed with respect the errors
of those who are timid and doubtful of themselves with regard to
points wherein the happiness of mankind is concerned. But in these
gentlemen there is nothing of the tender, parental solicitude which
fears to cut up the infant for the sake of an experiment. In the
vastness of their promises and the confidence of their predictions,
they far outdo all the boasting of empirics. The arrogance of their
pretensions in a manner provokes and challenges us to an inquiry
    I AM convinced that there are men of considerable parts among
the popular leaders in the National Assembly. Some of them display
eloquence in their speeches and their writings. This cannot be without
powerful and cultivated talents. But eloquence may exist without a
proportionable degree of wisdom. When I speak of ability, I am obliged
to distinguish. What they have done toward the support of their system
bespeaks no ordinary men. In the system itself, taken as the scheme of
a republic constructed for procuring the prosperity and security of
the citizen, and for promoting the strength and grandeur of the state,
I confess myself unable to find out anything which displays in a
single instance the work of a comprehensive and disposing mind or even
the provisions of a vulgar prudence. Their purpose everywhere seems to
have been to evade and slip aside from difficulty. This it has been
the glory of the great masters in all the arts to confront, and to
overcome; and when they had overcome the first difficulty, to turn
it into an instrument for new conquests over new difficulties, thus to
enable them to extend the empire of their science and even to push
forward, beyond the reach of their original thoughts, the landmarks of
the human understanding itself. Difficulty is a severe instructor, set
over us by the supreme ordinance of a parental Guardian and
Legislator, who knows us better than we know ourselves, as he loves us
better, too. Pater ipse colendi haud facilem esse viam voluit. He that
wrestles with us strengthens our nerves and sharpens our skill. Our
antagonist is our helper. This amicable conflict with difficulty
obliges us to an intimate acquaintance with our object and compels
us to consider it in all its relations. It will not suffer us to be
superficial. It is the want of nerves of understanding for such a
task, it is the degenerate fondness for tricking shortcuts and
little fallacious facilities that has in so many parts of the world
created governments with arbitrary powers. They have created the
late arbitrary monarchy of France. They have created the arbitrary
republic of Paris. With them defects in wisdom are to be supplied by
the plenitude of force. They get nothing by it. Commencing their
labors on a principle of sloth, they have the common fortune of
slothful men. The difficulties, which they rather had eluded than
escaped, meet them again in their course; they multiply and thicken on
them; they are involved, through a labyrinth of confused detail, in an
industry without limit and without direction; and, in conclusion,
the whole of their work becomes feeble, vicious, and insecure.
    It is this inability to wrestle with difficulty which has
obliged the arbitrary Assembly of France to commence their schemes
of reform with abolition and total destruction.* But is it in
destroying and pulling down that skill is displayed? Your mob can do
this as well at least as your assemblies. The shallowest
understanding, the rudest hand is more than equal to that task. Rage
and frenzy will pull down more in half an hour than prudence,
deliberation, and foresight can build up in a hundred years. The
errors and defects of old establishments are visible and palpable.
It calls for little ability to point them out; and where absolute
power is given, it requires but a word wholly to abolish the vice
and the establishment together. The same lazy but restless disposition
which loves sloth and hates quiet directs the politicians when they
come to work for supplying the place of what they have destroyed. To
make everything the reverse of what they have seen is quite as easy as
to destroy. No difficulties occur in what has never been tried.
Criticism is almost baffled in discovering the defects of what has not
existed; and eager enthusiasm and cheating hope have all the wide
field of imagination in which they may expatiate with little or no
    * A leading member of the Assembly, M. Rabaud de St. Etienne,
has expressed the principle of all their proceedings as clearly as
possible- Nothing can be more simple: "Tous les etablissemens en
France couronnent le malheur du peuple: pour le rendre heureux il faut
le renouveler; changer ses idees; changer ses loix; changer ses
moeurs;... changer les hommes; changer les choses; changer les mots...
tout detruire; oui, tout detruire; puisque tout est a recreer". This
gentleman was chosen president in an assembly not sitting at the
Quinze-vingt, or the Petits Maisons; and composed of persons giving
themselves out to be rational beings; but neither his ideas, language,
or conduct, differ in the smallest degree from the discourses,
opinions, and actions of those within and without the Assembly, who
direct the operations of the machine now at work in France.
    At once to preserve and to reform is quite another thing. When the
useful parts of an old establishment are kept, and what is
superadded is to be fitted to what is retained, a vigorous mind,
steady, persevering attention, various powers of comparison and
combination, and the resources of an understanding fruitful in
expedients are to be exercised; they are to be exercised in a
continued conflict with the combined force of opposite vices, with the
obstinacy that rejects all improvement and the levity that is fatigued
and disgusted with everything of which it is in possession. But you
may object- "A process of this kind is slow. It is not fit for an
assembly which glories in performing in a few months the work of ages.
Such a mode of reforming, possibly, might take up many years". Without
question it might; and it ought. It is one of the excellences of a
method in which time is amongst the assistants, that its operation
is slow and in some cases almost imperceptible. If circumspection
and caution are a part of wisdom when we work only upon inanimate
matter, surely they become a part of duty, too, when the subject of
our demolition and construction is not brick and timber but sentient
beings, by the sudden alteration of whose state, condition, and habits
multitudes may be rendered miserable. But it seems as if it were the
prevalent opinion in Paris that an unfeeling heart and an undoubting
confidence are the sole qualifications for a perfect legislator. Far
different are my ideas of that high office. The true lawgiver ought to
have a heart full of sensibility. He ought to love and respect his
kind, and to fear himself. It may be allowed to his temperament to
catch his ultimate object with an intuitive glance, but his
movements toward it ought to be deliberate. Political arrangement,
as it is a work for social ends, is to be only wrought by social
means. There mind must conspire with mind. Time is required to produce
that union of minds which alone can produce all the good we aim at.
Our patience will achieve more than our force. If I might venture to
appeal to what is so much out of fashion in Paris, I mean to
experience, I should tell you that in my course I have known and,
according to my measure, have co-operated with great men; and I have
never yet seen any plan which has not been mended by the observation
of those who were much inferior in understanding to the person who
took the lead in the business. By a slow but well-sustained progress
the effect of each step is watched; the good or ill success of the
first gives light to us in the second; and so, from light to light, we
are conducted with safety through the whole series. We see that the
parts of the system do not clash. The evils latent in the most
promising contrivances are provided for as they arise. One advantage
is as little as possible sacrificed to another. We compensate, we
reconcile, we balance. We are enabled to unite into a consistent whole
the various anomalies and contending principles that are found in
the minds and affairs of men. From hence arises, not an excellence
in simplicity, but one far superior, an excellence in composition.
Where the great interests of mankind are concerned through a long
succession of generations, that succession ought to be admitted into
some share in the councils which are so deeply to affect them. If
justice requires this, the work itself requires the aid of more
minds than one age can furnish. It is from this view of things that
the best legislators have been often satisfied with the
establishment of some sure, solid, and ruling principle in government-
a power like that which some of the philosophers have called a plastic
nature; and having fixed the principle, they have left it afterwards
    To proceed in this manner, that is, to proceed with a presiding
principle and a prolific energy is with me the criterion of profound
wisdom. What your politicians think the marks of a bold, hardy
genius are only proofs of a deplorable want of ability. By their
violent haste and their defiance of the process of nature, they are
delivered over blindly to every projector and adventurer, to every
alchemist and empiric. They despair of turning to account anything
that is common. Diet is nothing in their system of remedy. The worst
of it is that this their despair of curing common distempers by
regular methods arises not only from defect of comprehension but, I
fear, from some malignity of disposition. Your legislators seem to
have taken their opinions of all professions, ranks, and offices
from the declamations and buffooneries of satirists; who would
themselves be astonished if they were held to the letter of their
own descriptions. By listening only to these, your leaders regard
all things only on the side of their vices and faults, and view
those vices and faults under every color of exaggeration. It is
undoubtedly true, though it may seem paradoxical; but in general,
those who are habitually employed in finding and displaying faults are
unqualified for the work of reformation, because their minds are not
only unfurnished with patterns of the fair and good, but by habit they
come to take no delight in the contemplation of those things. By
hating vices too much, they come to love men too little. It is,
therefore, not wonderful that they should be indisposed and unable
to serve them. From hence arises the complexional disposition of
some of your guides to pull everything in pieces. At this malicious
game they display the whole of their quadrimanous activity. As to
the rest, the paradoxes of eloquent writers, brought forth purely as a
sport of fancy to try their talents, to rouse attention and excite
surprise, are taken up by these gentlemen, not in the spirit of the
original authors, as means of cultivating their taste and improving
their style. These paradoxes become with them serious grounds of
action upon which they proceed in regulating the most important
concerns of the state. Cicero ludicrously describes Cato as
endeavoring to act, in the commonwealth, upon the school paradoxes
which exercised the wits of the junior students in the Stoic
philosophy. If this was true of Cato, these gentlemen copy after him
in the manner of some persons who lived about his time- pede nudo
Catonem. Mr. Hume told me that he had from Rousseau himself the secret
of his principles of composition. That acute though eccentric observer
had perceived that to strike and interest the public the marvelous
must be produced; that the marvelous of the heathen mythology had long
since lost its effect; that the giants, magicians, fairies, and heroes
of romance which succeeded had exhausted the portion of credulity
which belonged to their age; that now nothing was left to the writer
but that species of the marvelous which might still be produced, and
with as great an effect as ever, though in another way; that is, the
marvelous in life, in manners, in characters, and in extraordinary
situations, giving rise to new and unlooked-for strokes in politics
and morals. I believe that were Rousseau alive and in one of his lucid
intervals, he would be shocked at the practical frenzy of his
scholars, who in their paradoxes are servile imitators, and even in
    Men who undertake considerable things, even in a regular way,
ought to give us ground to presume ability. But the physician of the
state who, not satisfied with the cure of distempers, undertakes to
regenerate constitutions ought to show uncommon powers. Some very
unusual appearances of wisdom ought to display themselves on the
face of the designs of those who appeal to no practice, and who copy
after no model. Has any such been manifested? I shall take a view
(it shall for the subject be a very short one) of what the Assembly
has done with regard, first, to the constitution of the legislature;
in the next place, to that of the executive power; then to that of the
judicature; afterwards to the model of the army; and conclude with the
system of finance; to see whether we can discover in any part of their
schemes the portentous ability which may justify these bold
undertakers in the superiority which they assume over mankind.
    IT IS IN THE MODEL of the sovereign and presiding part of this new
republic that we should expect their grand display. Here they were
to prove their title to their proud demands. For the plan itself at
large, and for the reasons on which it is grounded, I refer to the
journals of the Assembly of the 29th of September, 1789, and to the
subsequent proceedings which have made any alterations in the plan. So
far as in a matter somewhat confused I can see light, the system
remains substantially as it has been originally framed. My few remarks
will be such as regard its spirit, its tendency, and its fitness for
framing a popular commonwealth, which they profess theirs to be,
suited to the ends for which any commonwealth, and particularly such a
commonwealth, is made. At the same time I mean to consider its
    Old establishments are tried by their effects. If the people are
happy, united, wealthy, and powerful, we presume the rest. We conclude
that to be good from whence good is derived. In old establishments
various correctives have been found for their aberrations from theory.
Indeed, they are the results of various necessities and
expediencies. They are not often constructed after any theory;
theories are rather drawn from them. In them we often see the end best
obtained where the means seem not perfectly reconcilable to what we
may fancy was the original scheme. The means taught by experience
may be better suited to political ends than those contrived in the
original project. They again react upon the primitive constitution,
and sometimes improve the design itself, from which they seem to
have departed. I think all this might be curiously exemplified in
the British constitution. At worst, the errors and deviations of every
kind in reckoning are found and computed, and the ship proceeds in her
course. This is the case of old establishments; but in a new and
merely theoretic system, it is expected that every contrivance shall
appear, on the face of it, to answer its ends, especially where the
projectors are no way embarrassed with an endeavor to accommodate
the new building to an old one, either in the walls or on the
    The French builders, clearing away as mere rubbish whatever they
found and, like their ornamental gardeners, forming everything into an
exact level, propose to rest the whole local and general legislature
on three bases of three different kinds: one geometrical, one
arithmetical, and the third financial; the first of which they call
the basis of territory; the second, the basis of population; and the
third, the basis of contribution. For the accomplishment of the
first of these purposes they divide the area of their country into
eighty-three pieces, regularly square, of eighteen leagues by
eighteen. These large divisions are called Departments. These they
portion, proceeding by square measurement, into seventeen hundred
and twenty districts called Communes. These again they subdivide,
still proceeding by square measurement, into smaller districts
    At first view this geometrical basis of theirs presents not much
to admire or to blame. It calls for no great legislative talents.
Nothing more than an accurate land surveyor, with his chain, sight,
and theodolite, is requisite for such a plan as this. In the old
divisions of the country, various accidents at various times and the
ebb and flow of various properties and jurisdictions settled their
bounds. These bounds were not made upon any fixed system, undoubtedly.
They were subject to some inconveniences, but they were inconveniences
for which use had found remedies, and habit had supplied accommodation
and patience. In this new pavement of square within square, and this
organization and semi-organization, made on the system of Empedocles
and Buffon, and not upon any politic principle, it is impossible
that innumerable local inconveniences, to which men are not
habituated, must not arise. But these I pass over, because it requires
an accurate knowledge of the country, which I do not possess, to
    When these state surveyors came to take a view of their work of
measurement, they soon found that in politics the most fallacious of
all things was geometrical demonstration. They had then recourse to
another basis (or rather buttress) to support the building, which
tottered on that false foundation. It was evident that the goodness of
the soil, the number of the people, their wealth, and the largeness of
their contribution made such infinite variations between square and
square as to render mensuration a ridiculous standard of power in
the commonwealth, and equality in geometry the most unequal of all
measures in the distribution of men. However, they could not give it
up. But dividing their political and civil representation into three
parts, they allotted one of those parts to the square measurement,
without a single fact or calculation to ascertain whether this
territorial proportion of representation was fairly assigned, and
ought upon any principle really to be a third. Having, however,
given to geometry this portion (of a third for her dower) out of
compliment, I suppose, to that sublime science, they left the other
two to be scuffled for between the other parts, population and
    When they came to provide for population, they were not able to
proceed quite so smoothly as they had done in the field of their
geometry. Here their arithmetic came to bear upon their juridical
metaphysics. Had they stuck to their metaphysic principles, the
arithmetical process would be simple indeed. Men, with them, are
strictly equal and are entitled to equal rights in their own
government. Each head, on this system, would have its vote, and
every man would vote directly for the person who was to represent
him in the legislature. "But soft- by regular degrees, not yet".
This metaphysic principle to which law, custom, usage, policy,
reason were to yield is to yield itself to their pleasure. There
must be many degrees, and some stages, before the representative can
come in contact with his constituent. Indeed, as we shall soon see,
these two persons are to have no sort of communion with each other.
First, the voters in the Canton, who compose what they call "primary
assemblies", are to have a qualification. What! a qualification on the
indefeasible rights of men? Yes; but it shall be a very small
qualification. Our injustice shall be very little oppressive: only the
local valuation of three days' labor paid to the public. Why, this
is not much, I readily admit, for anything but the utter subversion of
your equalizing principle. As a qualification it might as well be
let alone, for it answers no one purpose for which qualifications
are established; and, on your ideas, it excludes from a vote the man
of all others whose natural equality stands the most in need of
protection and defense- I mean the man who has nothing else but his
natural equality to guard him. You order him to buy the right which
you before told him nature had given to him gratuitously at his birth,
and of which no authority on earth could lawfully deprive him. With
regard to the person who cannot come up to your market, a tyrannous
aristocracy, as against him, is established at the very outset by
    The gradation proceeds. These primary assemblies of the Canton
elect deputies to the Commune; one for every two hundred qualified
inhabitants. Here is the first medium put between the primary
elector and the representative legislator; and here a new turnpike
is fixed for taxing the rights of men with a second qualification; for
none can be elected into the Commune who does not pay the amount of
ten days' labor. Nor have we yet done. There is still to be another
gradation.* These Communes, chosen by the Canton, choose to the
Department; and the deputies of the Department choose their deputies
to the National Assembly. Here is a third barrier of a senseless
qualification. Every deputy to the National Assembly must pay, in
direct contribution, to the value of a mark of silver. Of all these
qualifying barriers we must think alike- that they are impotent to
secure independence, strong only to destroy the rights of men.
    * The Assembly, in executing the plan of their committee, made
some alterations. They have struck out one stage in these
gradations; this removes a part of the objection; but the main
objection, namely, that in their scheme the first constituent voter
has no connection with the representative legislator, remains in all
its force. There are other alterations, some possibly for the
better, some certainly for the worse; but to the author the merit or
demerit of these smaller alterations appears to be of no moment
where the scheme itself is fundamentally vicious and absurd.
    In all this process, which in its fundamental elements affects
to consider only population upon a principle of natural right, there
is a manifest attention to property, which, however just and
reasonable on other schemes, is on theirs perfectly unsupportable.
    When they come to their third basis, that of contribution, we find
that they have more completely lost sight of their rights of men. This
last basis rests entirely on property. A principle totally different
from the equality of men, and utterly irreconcilable to it, is thereby
admitted; but no sooner is this principle admitted than (as usual)
it is subverted; and it is not subverted (as we shall presently see)
to approximate the inequality of riches to the level of nature. The
additional share in the third portion of representation (a portion
reserved exclusively for the higher contribution) is made to regard
the district only, and not the individuals in it who pay. It is easy
to perceive, by the course of their reasonings, how much they were
embarrassed by their contradictory ideas of the rights of men and
the privileges of riches. The committee of constitution do as good
as admit that they are wholly irreconcilable. "The relation with
regard to the contributions is without doubt null (say they) when
the question is on the balance of the political rights as between
individual and individual, without which personal equality would be
destroyed and an aristocracy of the rich would be established. But
this inconvenience entirely disappears when the proportional
relation of the contribution is only considered in the great masses,
and is solely between province and province; it serves in that case
only to form a just reciprocal proportion between the cities without
    Here the principle of contribution, as taken between man and
man, is reprobated as null and destructive to equality, and as
pernicious, too, because it leads to the establishment of an
aristocracy of the rich. However, it must not be abandoned. And the
way of getting rid of the difficulty is to establish the inequality as
between department and department, leaving all the individuals in each
department upon an exact par. Observe that this parity between
individuals had been before destroyed when the qualifications within
the departments were settled; nor does it seem a matter of great
importance whether the equality of men be injured by masses or
individually. An individual is not of the same importance in a mass
represented by a few as in a mass represented by many. It would be too
much to tell a man jealous of his equality that the elector has the
same franchise who votes for three members as he who votes for ten.
    Now take it in the outer point of view and let us suppose their
principle of representation according to contribution, that is,
according to riches, to be well imagined and to be a necessary basis
for their republic. In this their third basis they assume that
riches ought to be respected, and that justice and policy require that
they should entitle men, in some mode or other, to a larger share in
the administration of public affairs; it is now to be seen how the
Assembly provides for the preeminence, or even for the security, of
the rich by conferring, in virtue of their opulence, that larger
measure of power to their district which is denied to them personally.
I readily admit (indeed I should lay it down as a fundamental
principle) that in a republican government which has a democratic
basis the rich do require an additional security above what is
necessary to them in monarchies. They are subject to envy, and through
envy to oppression. On the present scheme it is impossible to divine
what advantage they derive from the aristocratic preference upon which
the unequal representation of the masses is founded. The rich cannot
feel it, either as a support to dignity or as security to fortune, for
the aristocratic mass is generated from purely democratic
principles, and the preference given to it in the general
representation has no sort of reference to, or connection with, the
persons upon account of whose property this superiority of the mass is
established. If the contrivers of this scheme meant any sort of
favor to the rich, in consequence of their contribution, they ought to
have conferred the privilege either on the individual rich or on
some class formed of rich persons (as historians represent Servius
Tullius to have done in the early constitution of Rome), because the
contest between the rich and the poor is not a struggle between
corporation and corporation, but a contest between men and men- a
competition not between districts, but between descriptions. It
would answer its purpose better if the scheme were inverted: that
the vote of the masses were rendered equal, and that the votes
    Let us suppose one man in a district (it is an easy supposition)
to contribute as much as a hundred of his neighbors. Against these
he has but one vote. If there were but one representative for the
mass, his poor neighbors would outvote him by a hundred to one for
that single representative. Bad enough. But amends are to be made him.
How? The district, in virtue of his wealth, is to choose, say, ten
members instead of one; that is to say, by paying a very large
contribution he has the happiness of being outvoted a hundred to one
by the poor for ten representatives, instead of being outvoted exactly
in the same proportion for a single member. In truth, instead of
benefiting by this superior quantity of representation, the rich man
is subjected to an additional hardship. The increase of representation
within his province sets up nine persons more, and as many more than
nine as there may be democratic candidates, to cabal and intrigue, and
to flatter the people at his expense and to his oppression. An
interest is by this means held out to multitudes of the inferior sort,
in obtaining a salary of eighteen livres a day (to them a vast object)
besides the pleasure of a residence in Paris and their share in the
government of the kingdom. The more the objects of ambition are
multiplied and become democratic, just in that proportion the rich are
    Thus it must fare between the poor and the rich in the province
deemed aristocratic, which in its internal relation is the very
reverse of that character. In its external relation, that is, its
relation to the other provinces, I cannot see how the unequal
representation which is given to masses on account of wealth becomes
the means of preserving the equipoise and the tranquillity of the
commonwealth. For if it be one of the objects to secure the weak
from being crushed by the strong (as in all society undoubtedly it
is), how are the smaller and poorer of these masses to be saved from
the tyranny of the more wealthy? Is it by adding to the wealthy
further and more systematical means of oppressing them? When we come
to a balance of representation between corporate bodies, provincial
interests, emulations, and jealousies are full as likely to arise
among them as among individuals; and their divisions are likely to
produce a much hotter spirit of dissension, and something leading much
    I see that these aristocratic masses are made upon what is
called the principle of direct contribution. Nothing can be a more
unequal standard than this. The indirect contribution, that which
arises from duties on consumption, is in truth a better standard and
follows and discovers wealth more naturally than this of direct
contribution. It is difficult, indeed, to fix a standard of local
preference on account of the one, or of the other, or of both, because
some provinces may pay the more of either or of both on account of
causes not intrinsic, but originating from those very districts over
whom they have obtained a preference in consequence of their
ostensible contribution. If the masses were independent, sovereign
bodies who were to provide for a federative treasury by distinct
contingents, and that the revenue had not (as it has) many impositions
running through the whole, which affect men individually, and not
corporately, and which, by their nature, confound all territorial
limits, something might be said for the basis of contribution as
founded on masses. But of all things, this representation, to be
measured by contribution, is the most difficult to settle upon
principles of equity in a country which considers its districts as
members of a whole. For a great city, such as Bordeaux or Paris,
appears to pay a vast body of duties, almost out of all assignable
proportion to other places, and its mass is considered accordingly.
But are these cities the true contributors in that proportion? No. The
consumers of the commodities imported into Bordeaux, who are scattered
through all France, pay the import duties of Bordeaux. The produce
of the vintage in Guienne and Languedoc give to that city the means of
its contribution growing out of an export commerce. The landholders
who spend their estates in Paris, and are thereby the creators of that
city, contribute for Paris from the provinces out of which their
revenues arise. Very nearly the same arguments will apply to the
representative share given on account of direct contributions, because
the direct contribution must be assessed on wealth, real or
presumed; and that local wealth will itself arise from causes not
local, and which therefore in equity ought not to produce a local
    It is very remarkable that in this fundamental regulation which
settles the representation of the mass upon the direct contribution,
they have not yet settled how that direct contribution shall be
laid, and how apportioned. Perhaps there is some latent policy
toward the continuance of the present Assembly in this strange
procedure. However, until they do this, they can have no certain
constitution. It must depend at last upon the system of taxation,
and must vary with every variation in that system. As they have
contrived matters, their taxation does not so much depend on their
constitution as their constitution on their taxation. This must
introduce great confusion among the masses, as the variable
qualification for votes within the district must, if ever real
contested elections take place, cause infinite internal controversies.
    To compare together the three bases, not on their political
reason, but on the ideas on which the Assembly works, and to try its
consistency with itself, we cannot avoid observing that the
principle which the committee call the basis of population does not
begin to operate from the same point with the two other principles
called the bases of territory and of contribution, which are both of
an aristocratic nature. The consequence is that, where all three begin
to operate together, there is the most absurd inequality produced by
the operation of the former on the two latter principles. Every canton
contains four square leagues, and is estimated to contain, on the
average, 4000 inhabitants or 680 voters in the primary assemblies,
which vary in numbers with the population of the canton, and send
one deputy to the commune for every 200 voters. Nine cantons make a
    Now let us take a canton containing a seaport town of trade, or
a great manufacturing town. Let us suppose the population of this
canton to be 12,700 inhabitants, or 2193 voters, forming three primary
assemblies, and sending ten deputies to the commune.
    Oppose to this one canton two others of the remaining eight in the
same commune. These we may suppose to have their fair population of
4000 inhabitants and 680 voters each, or 8000 inhabitants and 1360
voters, both together. These will form only two primary assemblies and
    When the assembly of the commune comes to vote on the basis of
territory, which principle is first admitted to operate in that
assembly, the single canton which has half the territory of the
other two will have ten voices to six in the election of three
deputies to the assembly of the department chosen on the express
    This inequality, striking as it is, will be yet highly
aggravated if we suppose, as we fairly may, the several other
cantons of the commune to fall proportionably short of the average
population, as much as the principal canton exceeds it. Now as to
the basis of contribution, which also is a principle admitted first to
operate in the assembly of the commune. Let us again take one
canton, such as is stated above. If the whole of the direct
contributions paid by a great trading or manufacturing town be divided
equally among the inhabitants, each individual will be found to pay
much more than an individual living in the country according to the
same average. The whole paid by the inhabitants of the former will
be more than the whole paid by the inhabitants of the latter- we may
fairly assume one-third more. Then the 12,700 inhabitants, or 2193
voters of the canton, will pay as much as 19,050 inhabitants, or
3289 voters of the other cantons, which are nearly the estimated
proportion of inhabitants and voters of five other cantons. Now the
2193 voters will, as I before said, send only ten deputies to the
assembly; the 3289 voters will send sixteen. Thus, for an equal
share in the contribution of the whole commune, there will be a
difference of sixteen voices to ten in voting for deputies to be
chosen on the principle of representing the general contribution of
    By the same mode of computation we shall find 15,875
inhabitants, or 2741 voters of the other cantons, who pay one-sixth
LESS to the contribution of the whole commune, will have three
VOICES MORE than the 12,700 inhabitants, or 2193 voters of the one
    Such is the fantastical and unjust inequality between mass and
mass in this curious repartition of the rights of representation
arising out of territory and contribution. The qualifications which
these confer are in truth negative qualifications, that give a right
in an inverse proportion to the possession of them.
    In this whole contrivance of the three bases, consider it in any
light you please, I do not see a variety of objects reconciled in
one consistent whole, but several contradictory principles reluctantly
and irreconcilably brought and held together by your philosophers,
like wild beasts shut up in a cage to claw and bite each other to
    I am afraid I have gone too far into their way of considering
the formation of a constitution. They have much, but bad, metaphysics;
much, but bad, geometry; much, but false, proportionate arithmetic;
but if it were all as exact as metaphysics, geometry, and arithmetic
ought to be, and if their schemes were perfectly consistent in all
their parts, it would make only a more fair and sightly vision. It
is remarkable that, in a great arrangement of mankind, not one
reference whatsoever is to be found to anything moral or anything
politic, nothing that relates to the concerns, the actions, the
passions, the interests of men. Hominem non sapiunt.
    You see I only consider this constitution as electoral, and
leading by steps to the National Assembly. I do not enter into the
internal government of the departments and their genealogy through the
communes and cantons. These local governments are, in the original
plan, to be as nearly as possible composed in the same manner and on
the same principles with the elective assemblies. They are each of
them bodies perfectly compact and rounded in themselves.
    You cannot but perceive in this scheme that it has a direct and
immediate tendency to sever France into a variety of republics, and to
render them totally independent of each other without any direct
constitutional means of coherence, connection, or subordination,
except what may be derived from their acquiescence in the
determinations of the general congress of the ambassadors from each
independent republic. Such in reality is the National Assembly, and
such governments I admit do exist in the world, though in forms
infinitely more suitable to the local and habitual circumstances of
their people. But such associations, rather than bodies politic,
have generally been the effect of necessity, not choice; and I believe
the present French power is the very first body of citizens who,
having obtained full authority to do with their country what they
pleased, have chosen to dissever it in this barbarous manner.
    It is impossible not to observe that, in the spirit of this
geometrical distribution and arithmetical arrangement, these pretended
citizens treat France exactly like a country of conquest. Acting as
conquerors, they have imitated the policy of the harshest of that
harsh race. The policy of such barbarous victors, who contemn a
subdued people and insult their feelings, has ever been, as much as in
them lay, to destroy all vestiges of the ancient country, in religion,
in polity, in laws, and in manners; to confound all territorial
limits; to produce a general poverty; to put up their properties to
auction; to crush their princes, nobles, and pontiffs; to lay low
everything which had lifted its head above the level, or which could
serve to combine or rally, in their distresses, the disbanded people
under the standard of old opinion. They have made France free in the
manner in which those sincere friends to the rights of mankind, the
Romans, freed Greece, Macedon, and other nations. They destroyed the
bonds of their union under color of providing for the independence
    When the members who compose these new bodies of cantons,
communes, and departments- arrangements purposely produced through the
medium of confusion- begin to act, they will find themselves in a
great measure strangers to one another. The electors and elected
throughout, especially in the rural cantons, will be frequently
without any civil habitudes or connections, or any of that natural
discipline which is the soul of a true republic. Magistrates and
collectors of revenue are now no longer acquainted with their
districts, bishops with their dioceses, or curates with their
parishes. These new colonies of the rights of men bear a strong
resemblance to that sort of military colonies which Tacitus has
observed upon in the declining policy of Rome. In better and wiser
days (whatever course they took with foreign nations) they were
careful to make the elements of methodical subordination and
settlement to be coeval, and even to lay the foundations of civil
discipline in the military.* But when all the good arts had fallen
into ruin, they proceeded, as your Assembly does, upon the equality of
men, and with as little judgment and as little care for those things
which make a republic tolerable or durable. But in this, as well as
almost every instance, your new commonwealth is born and bred and
fed in those corruptions which mark degenerated and worn-out
republics. Your child comes into the world with the symptoms of death:
the facies Hippocratica forms the character of its physiognomy, and
    * Non, ut olim, universae legiones deducebantur cum tribunis, et
centurionibus, et sui cujusque ordinis militibus, ut consensu et
caritate rempublicam afficerent; sed ignoti inter se, diversis
manipulis, sine rectore, sine affectibus mutuis, quasi ex alio
genere mortalium, repente in unum collecti, numerus magis quam
colonia. Tac. Annal. 1. 14, sect. 27. All this will be still more
applicable to the unconnected, rotatory, biennial national assemblies,
    The legislators who framed the ancient republics knew that their
business was too arduous to be accomplished with no better apparatus
than the metaphysics of an undergraduate, and the mathematics and
arithmetic of an exciseman. They had to do with men, and they were
obliged to study human nature. They had to do with citizens, and
they were obliged to study the effects of those habits which are
communicated by the circumstances of civil life. They were sensible
that the operation of this second nature on the first produced a new
combination; and thence arose many diversities amongst men,
according to their birth, their education, their professions, the
periods of their lives, their residence in towns or in the country,
their several ways of acquiring and of fixing property, and
according to the quality of the property itself- all which rendered
them as it were so many different species of animals. From hence
they thought themselves obliged to dispose their citizens into such
classes, and to place them in such situations in the state, as their
peculiar habits might qualify them to fill, and to allot to them
such appropriated privileges as might secure to them what their
specific occasions required, and which might furnish to each
description such force as might protect it in the conflict caused by
the diversity of interests that must exist and must contend in all
complex society; for the legislator would have been ashamed that the
coarse husbandman should well know how to assort and to use his sheep,
horses, and oxen, and should have enough of common sense not to
abstract and equalize them all into animals without providing for each
kind an appropriate food, care, and employment, whilst he, the
economist, disposer, and shepherd of his own kindred, subliming
himself into an airy metaphysician, was resolved to know nothing of
his flocks but as men in general. It is for this reason that
Montesquieu observed very justly that in their classification of the
citizens the great legislators of antiquity made the greatest
display of their powers, and even soared above themselves. It is
here that your modern legislators have gone deep into the negative
series, and sunk even below their own nothing. As the first sort of
legislators attended to the different kinds of citizens and combined
them into one commonwealth, the others, the metaphysical and
alchemistical legislators, have taken the direct contrary course. They
have attempted to confound all sorts of citizens, as well as they
could, into one homogeneous mass; and then they divided this their
amalgama into a number of incoherent republics. They reduce men to
loose counters, merely for the sake of simple telling, and not to
figures whose power is to arise from their place in the table. The
elements of their own metaphysics might have taught them better
lessons. The troll of their categorical table might have informed them
that there was something else in the intellectual world besides
substance and quantity. They might learn from the catechism of
metaphysics that there were eight heads more* in every complex
deliberation which they have never thought of, though these, of all
the ten, are the subjects on which the skill of man can operate
    * Qualitas, relatio, actio, passio, ubi, quando, situs, habitus.
    So far from this able disposition of some of the old republican
legislators, which follows with a solicitous accuracy the moral
conditions and propensities of men, they have leveled and crushed
together all the orders which they found, even under the coarse
unartificial arrangement of the monarchy, in which mode of
government the classing of the citizens is not of so much importance
as in a republic. It is true, however, that every such classification,
if properly ordered, is good in all forms of government, and
composes a strong barrier against the excesses of despotism, as well
as it is the necessary means of giving effect and permanence to a
republic. For want of something of this kind, if the present project
of a republic should fail, all securities to a moderated freedom
fail along with it; all the indirect restraints which mitigate
despotism are removed, insomuch that if monarchy should ever again
obtain an entire ascendancy in France, under this or under any other
dynasty, it will probably be, if not voluntarily tempered at setting
out by the wise and virtuous counsels of the prince, the most
completely arbitrary power that has ever appeared on earth. This is to
    The confusion which attends on all such proceedings they even
declare to be one of their objects, and they hope to secure their
constitution by a terror of a return of those evils which attended
their making it. "By this," say they, "its destruction will become
difficult to authority, which cannot break it up without the entire
disorganization of the whole state." They presume that, if this
authority should ever come to the same degree of power that they
have acquired, it would make a more moderate and chastised use of
it, and would piously tremble entirely to disorganize the state in the
savage manner that they have done. They expect, from the virtues of
returning despotism, the security which is to be enjoyed by the
    I WISH, Sir, that you and my readers would give an attentive
perusal to the work of M. de Calonne on this subject. It is, indeed,
not only an eloquent, but an able and instructive, performance. I
confine myself to what he says relative to the constitution of the new
state and to the condition of the revenue. As to the disputes of
this minister with his rivals, I do not wish to pronounce upon them.
As little do I mean to hazard any opinion concerning his ways and
means, financial or political, for taking his country out of its
present disgraceful and deplorable situation of servitude, anarchy,
bankruptcy, and beggary. I cannot speculate quite so sanguinely as
he does; but he is a Frenchman, and has a closer duty relative to
those objects, and better means of judging of them, than I can have. I
wish that the formal avowal which he refers to, made by one of the
principal leaders in the Assembly concerning the tendency of their
scheme to bring France not only from a monarchy to a republic, but
from a republic to a mere confederacy, may be very particularly
attended to. It adds new force to my observations, and indeed M. de
Calonne's work supplies my deficiencies by many new and striking
arguments on most of the subjects of this letter.*
    It is this resolution, to break their country into separate
republics, which has driven them into the greatest number of their
difficulties and contradictions. If it were not for this, all the
questions of exact equality and these balances, never to be settled,
of individual rights, population, and contribution would be wholly
useless. The representation, though derived from parts, would be a
duty which equally regarded the whole. Each deputy to the Assembly
would be the representative of France, and of all its descriptions, of
the many and of the few, of the rich and of the poor, of the great
districts and of the small. All these districts would themselves be
subordinate to some standing authority, existing independently of
them, an authority in which their representation, and everything
that belongs to it, originated, and to which it was pointed. This
standing, unalterable, fundamental government would make, and it is
the only thing which could make, that territory truly and properly a
whole. With us, when we elect popular representatives, we send them to
a council in which each man individually is a subject and submitted to
a government complete in all its ordinary functions. With you the
elective Assembly is the sovereign, and the sole sovereign; all the
members are therefore integral parts of this sole sovereignty. But
with us it is totally different. With us the representative, separated
from the other parts, can have no action and no existence. The
government is the point of reference of the several members and
districts of our representation. This is the center of our unity. This
government of reference is a trustee for the whole, and not for the
parts. So is the other branch of our public council, I mean the
House of Lords. With us the king and the lords are several and joint
securities for the equality of each district, each province, each
city. When did you hear in Great Britain of any province suffering
from the inequality of its representation, what district from having
no representation at all? Not only our monarchy and our peerage secure
the equality on which our unity depends, but it is the spirit of the
House of Commons itself. The very inequality of representation,
which is so foolishly complained of, is perhaps the very thing which
prevents us from thinking or acting as members for districts. Cornwall
elects as many members as all Scotland. But is Cornwall better taken
care of than Scotland? Few trouble their heads about any of your
bases, out of some giddy clubs. Most of those who wish for any change,
upon any plausible grounds, desire it on different ideas.
    Your new constitution is the very reverse of ours in its
principle; and I am astonished how any persons could dream of
holding out anything done in it as an example for Great Britain.
With you there is little, or rather no, connection between the last
representative and the first constituent. The member who goes to the
National Assembly is not chosen by the people, nor accountable to
them. There are three elections before he is chosen; two sets of
magistracy intervene between him and the primary assembly, so as to
render him, as I have said, an ambassador of a state, and not the
representative of the people within a state. By this the whole
spirit of the election is changed, nor can any corrective which your
constitution-mongers have devised render him anything else than what
he is. The very attempt to do it would inevitably introduce a
confusion, if possible, more horrid than the present. There is no
way to make a connection between the original constituent and the
representative, but by the circuitous means which may lead the
candidate to apply in the first instance to the primary electors, in
order that by their authoritative instructions (and something more
perhaps) these primary electors may force the two succeeding bodies of
electors to make a choice agreeable to their wishes. But this would
plainly subvert the whole scheme. It would be to plunge them back into
that tumult and confusion of popular election which, by their
interposed gradation of elections, they mean to avoid, and at length
to risk the whole fortune of the state with those who have the least
knowledge of it and the least interest in it. This is a perpetual
dilemma into which they are thrown by the vicious, weak, and
contradictory principles they have chosen. Unless the people break
up and level this gradation, it is plain that they do not at all
substantially elect to the Assembly; indeed, they elect as little in
    What is it we all seek for in an election? To answer its real
purposes, you must first possess the means of knowing the fitness of
your man; and then you must retain some hold upon him by personal
obligation or dependence. For what end are these primary electors
complimented, or rather mocked, with a choice? They can never know
anything of the qualities of him that is to serve them, nor has he any
obligation whatsoever to them. Of all the powers unfit to be delegated
by those who have any real means of judging, that most peculiarly
unfit is what relates to a personal choice. In case of abuse, that
body of primary electors never can call the representative to an
account for his conduct. He is too far removed from them in the
chain of representation. If he acts improperly at the end of his two
years' lease, it does not concern him for two years more. By the new
French constitution the best and the wisest representatives go equally
with the worst into this Limbus Patrum. Their bottoms are supposed
foul, and they must go into dock to be refitted. Every man who has
served in an assembly is ineligible for two years after. Just as these
magistrates begin to learn their trade, like chimney sweepers, they
are disqualified for exercising it. Superficial, new, petulant
acquisition, and interrupted, dronish, broken, ill recollection is
to be the destined character of all your future governors. Your
constitution has too much of jealousy to have much of sense in it. You
consider the breach of trust in the representative so principally that
you do not at all regard the question of his fitness to execute it.
    This purgatory interval is not unfavorable to a faithless
representative, who may be as good a canvasser as he was a bad
governor. In this time he may cabal himself into a superiority over
the wisest and most virtuous. As in the end all the members of this
elective constitution are equally fugitive and exist only for the
election, they may be no longer the same persons who had chosen him,
to whom he is to be responsible when he solicits for a renewal of
his trust. To call all the secondary electors of the Commune to
account is ridiculous, impracticable, and unjust; they may
themselves have been deceived in their choice, as the third set of
electors, those of the Department, may be in theirs. In your elections
    FINDING NO SORT OF PRINCIPLE of coherence with each other in the
nature and constitution of the several new republics of France, I
considered what cement the legislators had provided for them from
any extraneous materials. Their confederations, their spectacles,
their civic feasts, and their enthusiasm I take no notice of; they are
nothing but mere tricks; but tracing their policy through their
actions, I think I can distinguish the arrangements by which they
propose to hold these republics together. The first is the
confiscation, with the compulsory paper currency annexed to it; the
second is the supreme power of the city of Paris; the third is the
general army of the state. Of this last I shall reserve what I have to
say until I come to consider the army as a head by itself.
    As to the operation of the first (the confiscation and paper
currency) merely as a cement, I cannot deny that these, the one
depending on the other, may for some time compose some sort of
cement if their madness and folly in the management, and in the
tempering of the parts together, does not produce a repulsion in the
very outset. But allowing to the scheme some coherence and some
duration, it appears to me that if, after a while, the confiscation
should not be found sufficient to support the paper coinage (as I am
morally certain it will not), then, instead of cementing, it will
add infinitely to the dissociation, distraction, and confusion of
these confederate republics, both with relation to each other and to
the several parts within themselves. But if the confiscation should so
far succeed as to sink the paper currency, the cement is gone with the
circulation. In the meantime its binding force will be very uncertain,
and it will straiten or relax with every variation in the credit of
    One thing only is certain in this scheme, which is an effect
seemingly collateral, but direct, I have no doubt, in the minds of
those who conduct this business, that is, its effect in producing an
oligarchy in every one of the republics. A paper circulation, not
founded on any real money deposited or engaged for, amounting
already to forty-four millions of English money, and this currency
by force substituted in the place of the coin of the kingdom, becoming
thereby the substance of its revenue as well as the medium of all
its commercial and civil intercourse, must put the whole of what
power, authority, and influence is left, in any form whatsoever it may
assume, into the hands of the managers and conductors of this
    In England, we feel the influence of the Bank, though it is only
the center of a voluntary dealing. He knows little indeed of the
influence of money upon mankind who does not see the force of the
management of a monied concern which is so much more extensive and
in its nature so much more depending on the managers than any of ours.
But this is not merely a money concern. There is another member in the
system inseparably connected with this money management. It consists
in the means of drawing out at discretion portions of the
confiscated lands for sale, and carrying on a process of continual
transmutation of paper into land, and land into paper. When we
follow this process in its effects, we may conceive something of the
intensity of the force with which this system must operate. By this
means the spirit of money-jobbing and speculation goes into the mass
of land itself and incorporates with it. By this kind of operation
that species of property becomes (as it were) volatilized; it
assumes an unnatural and monstrous activity, and thereby throws into
the hands of the several managers, principal and subordinate, Parisian
and provincial, all the representative of money and perhaps a full
tenth part of all the land in France, which has now acquired the worst
and most pernicious part of the evil of a paper circulation, the
greatest possible uncertainty in its value. They have reversed the
Latonian kindness to the landed property of Delos. They have sent
theirs to be blown about, like the light fragments of a wreck, oras et
    The new dealers, being all habitually adventurers and without
any fixed habits of local predilections, will purchase to job out
again, as the market of paper or of money or of land shall present
an advantage. For though a holy bishop thinks that agriculture will
derive great advantages from the "enlightened" usurers who are to
purchase the church confiscations, I, who am not a good but an old
farmer, with great humility beg leave to tell his late lordship that
usury is not a tutor of agriculture; and if the word "enlightened"
be understood according to the new dictionary, as it always is in your
new schools, I cannot conceive how a man's not believing in God can
teach him to cultivate the earth with the least of any additional
skill or encouragement. "Diis immortalibus sero", said an old Roman,
when he held one handle of the plough, whilst Death held the other.
Though you were to join in the commission all the directors of the two
academies to the directors of the Caisse d'Escompte, one old,
experienced peasant is worth them all. I have got more information
upon a curious and interesting branch of husbandry, in one short
conversation with an old Carthusian monk, than I have derived from all
the Bank directors that I have ever conversed with. However, there
is no cause for apprehension from the meddling of money dealers with
rural economy. These gentlemen are too wise in their generation. At
first, perhaps, their tender and susceptible imaginations may be
captivated with the innocent and unprofitable delights of a pastoral
life; but in a little time they will find that agriculture is a
trade much more laborious, and much less lucrative, than that which
they had left. After making its panegyric, they will turn their
backs on it like their great precursor and prototype. They may, like
him, begin by singing "Beatus ille" but what will be the end?
They will cultivate the Caisse d'Eglise, under the sacred auspices
of this prelate, with much more profit than its vineyards and its
cornfields. They will employ their talents according to their habits
and their interests. They will not follow the plough whilst they can
    Your legislators, in everything new, are the very first who have
founded a commonwealth upon gaming, and infused this spirit into it as
its vital breath. The great object in these politics is to
metamorphose France from a great kingdom into one great playtable;
to turn its inhabitants into a nation of gamesters; to make
speculation as extensive as life; to mix it with all its concerns
and to divert the whole of the hopes and fears of the people from
their usual channels into the impulses, passions, and superstitions of
those who live on chances. They loudly proclaim their opinion that
this their present system of a republic cannot possibly exist
without this kind of gaming fund, and that the very thread of its life
is spun out of the staple of these speculations. The old gaming in
funds was mischievous enough, undoubtedly, but it was so only to
individuals. Even when it had its greatest extent, in the
Mississippi and South Sea, it affected but few, comparatively; where
it extends further, as in lotteries, the spirit has but a single
object. But where the law, which in most circumstances forbids, and in
none countenances, gaming, is itself debauched so as to reverse its
nature and policy and expressly to force the subject to this
destructive table by bringing the spirit and symbols of gaming into
the minutest matters and engaging everybody in it, and in
everything, a more dreadful epidemic distemper of that kind is
spread than yet has appeared in the world. With you a man can
neither earn nor buy his dinner without a speculation. What he
receives in the morning will not have the same value at night. What he
is compelled to take as pay for an old debt will not be received as
the same when he comes to pay a debt contracted by himself, nor will
it be the same when by prompt payment he would avoid contracting any
debt at all. Industry must wither away. Economy must be driven from
your country. Careful provision will have no existence. Who will labor
without knowing the amount of his pay? Who will study to increase what
none can estimate? Who will accumulate, when he does not know the
value of what he saves? If you abstract it from its uses in gaming, to
accumulate your paper wealth would be not the providence of a man, but
    The truly melancholy part of the policy of systematically making a
nation of gamesters is this, that though all are forced to play, few
can understand the game; and fewer still are in a condition to avail
themselves of the knowledge. The many must be the dupes of the few who
conduct the machine of these speculations. What effect it must have on
the country people is visible. The townsman can calculate from day
to day, not so the inhabitant of the country. When the peasant first
brings his corn to market, the magistrate in the towns obliges him
to take the assignat at par; when he goes to the shop with his
money, he finds it seven per cent the worse for crossing the way. This
market he will not readily resort to again. The townspeople will be
inflamed; they will force the country people to bring their corn.
Resistance will begin, and the murders of Paris and St. Denis may be
    What signifies the empty compliment paid to the country by
giving it, perhaps, more than its share in the theory of your
representation? Where have you placed the real power over monied and
landed circulation? Where have you placed the means of raising and
falling the value of every man's freehold? Those whose operations
can take form, or add ten per cent to, the possessions of every man in
France must be the masters of every man in France. The whole of the
power obtained by this revolution will settle in the towns among the
burghers and the monied directors who lead them. The landed gentleman,
the yeoman, and the peasant have, none of them, habits or inclinations
or experience which can lead them to any share in this the sole source
of power and influence now left in France. The very nature of a
country life, the very nature of landed property, in all the
occupations, and all the pleasures they afford, render combination and
arrangement (the sole way of procuring and exerting influence) in a
manner impossible amongst country people. Combine them by all the
art you can, and all the industry, they are always dissolving into
individuality. Anything in the nature of incorporation is almost
impracticable amongst them. Hope, fear, alarm, jealousy, the
ephemerous tale that does its business and dies in a day- all these
things which are the reins and spurs by which leaders check or urge
the minds of followers are not easily employed, or hardly at all,
amongst scattered people. They assemble, they arm, they act with the
utmost difficulty and at the greatest charge. Their efforts, if ever
they can be commenced, cannot be sustained. They cannot proceed
systematically. If the country gentlemen attempt an influence
through the mere income of their property, what is it to that of those
who have ten times their income to sell, and who can ruin their
property by bringing their plunder to meet it at market? If the landed
man wishes to mortgage, he falls the value of his land and raises
the value of assignats. He augments the power of his enemy by the very
means he must take to contend with him. The country gentleman,
therefore, the officer by sea and land, the man of liberal views and
habits, attached to no profession, will be as completely excluded from
the government of his country as if he were legislatively
proscribed. It is obvious that in the towns all things which
conspire against the country gentleman combine in favor of the money
manager and director. In towns combination is natural. The habits of
burghers, their occupations, their diversion, their business, their
idleness continually bring them into mutual contact. Their virtues and
their vices are sociable; they are always in garrison; and they come
embodied and half disciplined into the hands of those who mean to form
    All these considerations leave no doubt on my mind that, if this
monster of a constitution can continue, France will be wholly governed
by the agitators in corporations, by societies in the towns formed
of directors of assignats, and trustees for the sale of church
lands, attorneys, agents, money jobbers, speculators, and adventurers,
composing an ignoble oligarchy founded on the destruction of the
crown, the church, the nobility, and the people. Here end all the
deceitful dreams and visions of the equality and rights of men. In the
Serbonian bog of this base oligarchy they are all absorbed, sunk,
    Though human eyes cannot trace them, one would be tempted to think
some great offenses in France must cry to heaven, which has thought
fit to punish it with a subjection to a vile and inglorious domination
in which no comfort or compensation is to be found in any, even of
those false, splendors which, playing about other tyrannies, prevent
mankind from feeling themselves dishonored even whilst they are
oppressed. I must confess I am touched with a sorrow, mixed with
some indignation, at the conduct of a few men, once of great rank
and still of great character, who, deluded with specious names, have
engaged in a business too deep for the line of their understanding
to fathom; who have lent their fair reputation and the authority of
their high-sounding names to the designs of men with whom they could
not be acquainted, and have thereby made their very virtues operate to
    THE second material of cement for their new republic is the
superiority of the city of Paris; and this I admit is strongly
connected with the other cementing principle of paper circulation
and confiscation. It is in this part of the project we must look for
the cause of the destruction of all the old bounds of provinces and
jurisdictions, ecclesiastical and secular, and the dissolution of
all ancient combinations of things, as well as the formation of so
many small unconnected republics. The power of the city of Paris is
evidently one great spring of all their politics. It is through the
power of Paris, now become the center and focus of jobbing, that the
leaders of this faction direct, or rather command, the whole
legislative and the whole executive government. Everything, therefore,
must be done which can confirm the authority of that city over the
other republics. Paris is compact; she has an enormous strength,
wholly disproportioned to the force of any of the square republics;
and this strength is collected and condensed within a narrow
compass. Paris has a natural and easy connection of its parts, which
will not be affected by any scheme of a geometrical constitution,
nor does it much signify whether its proportion of representation be
more or less, since it has the whole draft of fishes in its dragnet.
The other divisions of the kingdom, being hackled and torn to
pieces, and separated from all their habitual means and even
principles of union, cannot, for some time at least, confederate
against her. Nothing was to be left in all the subordinate members but
weakness, disconnection, and confusion. To confirm this part of the
plan, the Assembly has lately come to a resolution that no two of
their republics shall have the same commander-in-chief.
    To a person who takes a view of the whole, the strength of
Paris, thus formed, will appear a system of general weakness. It is
boasted that the geometrical policy has been adopted, that all local
ideas should be sunk, and that the people should no longer be Gascons,
Picards, Bretons, Normans, but Frenchmen, with one country, one heart,
and one Assembly. But instead of being all Frenchmen, the greater
likelihood is that the inhabitants of that region will shortly have no
country. No man ever was attached by a sense of pride, partiality,
or real affection to a description of square measurement. He never
will glory in belonging to the Chequer No. 71, or to any other
badge-ticket. We begin our public affections in our families. No
cold relation is a zealous citizen. We pass on to our neighborhoods
and our habitual provincial connections. These are inns and resting
places. Such divisions of our country as have been formed by habit,
and not by a sudden jerk of authority, were so many little images of
the great country in which the heart found something which it could
fill. The love to the whole is not extinguished by this subordinate
partiality. Perhaps it is a sort of elemental training to those higher
and more large regards by which alone men come to be affected, as with
their own concern, in the prosperity of a kingdom so extensive as that
of France. In that general territory itself, as in the old name of
provinces, the citizens are interested from old prejudices and
unreasoned habits, and not on account of the geometric properties of
its figure. The power and pre-eminence of Paris does certainly press
down and hold these republics together as long as it lasts. But, for
the reasons I have already given you, I think it cannot last very
    Passing from the civil creating and the civil cementing principles
of this constitution to the National Assembly, which is to appear
and act as sovereign, we see a body in its constitution with every
possible power, and no possible external control. We see a body
without fundamental laws, without established maxims, without
respected rules of proceeding, which nothing can keep firm to any
system whatsoever. Their idea of their powers is always taken at the
utmost stretch of legislative competence, and their examples for
common cases from the exceptions of the most urgent necessity. The
future is to be in most respects like the present Assembly; but, by
the mode of the new elections and the tendency of the new
circulations, it will be purged of the small degree of internal
control existing in a minority chosen originally from various
interests, and preserving something of their spirit. If possible,
the next Assembly must be worse than the present. The present, by
destroying and altering everything, will leave to their successors
apparently nothing popular to do. They will be roused by emulation and
example to enterprises the boldest and the most absurd. To suppose
such an Assembly sitting in perfect quietude is ridiculous.
    Your all-sufficient legislators, in their hurry to do everything
at once, have forgotten one thing that seems essential, and which I
believe never has been before, in the theory or the practice,
omitted by any projector of a republic. They have forgotten to
constitute a senate or something of that nature and character. Never
before this time was heard of a body politic composed of one
legislative and active assembly, and its executive officers, without
such a council, without something to which foreign states might
connect themselves; something to which, in the ordinary detail of
government, the people could look up; something which might give a
bias and steadiness and preserve something like consistency in the
proceedings of state. Such a body kings generally have as a council. A
monarchy may exist without it, but it seems to be in the very
essence of a republican government. It holds a sort of middle place
between the supreme power exercised by the people, or immediately
delegated from them, and the mere executive. Of this there are no
traces in your constitution, and in providing nothing of this kind
your Solons and Numas have, as much as in anything else, discovered
    LET US NOW TURN OUR EYES to what they have done toward the
formation of an executive power. For this they have chosen a
degraded king. This their first executive officer is to be a machine
without any sort of deliberative discretion in any one act of his
function. At best he is but a channel to convey to the National
Assembly such matter as it may import that body to know. If he had
been made the exclusive channel, the power would not have been without
its importance, though infinitely perilous to those who would choose
to exercise it. But public intelligence and statement of facts may
pass to the Assembly with equal authenticity through any other
conveyance. As to the means, therefore, of giving a direction to
measures by the statement of an authorized reporter, this office of
    To consider the French scheme of an executive officer, in its
two natural divisions of civil and political.- In the first, it must
be observed that, according to the new constitution, the higher
parts of judicature, in either of its lines, are not in the king.
The king of France is not the fountain of justice. The judges, neither
the original nor the appellate, are of his nomination. He neither
proposes the candidates, nor has a negative on the choice. He is not
even the public prosecutor. He serves only as a notary to authenticate
the choice made of the judges in the several districts. By his
officers he is to execute their sentence. When we look into the true
nature of his authority, he appears to be nothing more than a chief of
bum bailiffs, sergeants at mace, catchpoles, jailers, and hangmen.
It is impossible to place anything called royalty in a more
degrading point of view. A thousand times better had it been for the
dignity of this unhappy prince that he had nothing at all to do with
the administration of justice, deprived as he is of all that is
venerable and all that is consolatory in that function, without
power of originating any process, without a power of suspension,
mitigation, or pardon. Everything in justice that is vile and odious
is thrown upon him. It was not for nothing that the Assembly has
been at such pains to remove the stigma from certain offices when they
are resolved to place the person who had lately been their king in a
situation but one degree above the executioner, and in an office
nearly of the same quality. It is not in nature that, situated as
the king of the French now is, he can respect himself or can be
    View this new executive officer on the side of his political
capacity, as he acts under the orders of the National Assembly. To
execute laws is a royal office; to execute orders is not to be a king.
However, a political executive magistracy, though merely such, is a
great trust. It is a trust indeed that has much depending upon its
faithful and diligent performance, both in the person presiding in
it and in all its subordinates. Means of performing this duty ought to
be given by regulation; and dispositions toward it ought to be infused
by the circumstances attendant on the trust. It ought to be
environed with dignity, authority, and consideration, and it ought
to lead to glory. The office of execution is an office of exertion. It
is not from impotence we are to expect the tasks of power. What sort
of person is a king to command executory service, who has no means
whatsoever to reward it? Not in a permanent office; not in a grant
of land; no, not in a pension of fifty pounds a year; not in the
vainest and most trivial title. In France, the king is no more the
fountain of honor than he is the fountain of justice. All rewards, all
distinctions are in other hands. Those who serve the king can be
actuated by no natural motive but fear- by a fear of everything except
their master. His functions of internal coercion are as odious as
those which he exercises in the department of justice. If relief is to
be given to any municipality, the Assembly gives it. If troops are
to be sent to reduce them to obedience to the Assembly, the king is to
execute the order; and upon every occasion he is to be spattered
over with the blood of his people. He has no negative; yet his name
and authority is used to enforce every harsh decree. Nay, he must
concur in the butchery of those who shall attempt to free him from his
imprisonment or show the slightest attachment to his person or to
    Executive magistracy ought to be constituted in such a manner that
those who compose it should be disposed to love and to venerate
those whom they are bound to obey. A purposed neglect or, what is
worse, a literal but perverse and malignant obedience must be the ruin
of the wisest counsels. In vain will the law attempt to anticipate
or to follow such studied neglects and fraudulent attentions. To
make them act zealously is not in the competence of law. Kings, even
such as are truly kings, may and ought to bear the freedom of subjects
that are obnoxious to them. They may, too, without derogating from
themselves, bear even the authority of such persons if it promotes
their service. Louis the Thirteenth mortally hated the Cardinal de
Richelieu, but his support of that minister against his rivals was the
source of all the glory of his reign and the solid foundation of his
throne itself. Louis the Fourteenth, when come to the throne, did
not love the Cardinal Mazarin, but for his interests he preserved
him in power. When old, he detested Louvois, but for years, whilst
he faithfully served his greatness, he endured his person. When George
the Second took Mr. Pitt, who certainly was not agreeable to him, into
his councils, he did nothing which could humble a wise sovereign.
But these ministers, who were chosen by affairs, not by affections,
acted in the name of, and in trust for, kings, and not as their
avowed, constitutional, and ostensible masters. I think it
impossible that any king, when he has recovered his first terrors, can
cordially infuse vivacity and vigor into measures which he knows to be
dictated by those who, he must be persuaded, are in the highest degree
ill affected to his person. Will any ministers who serve such a king
(or whatever he may be called) with but a decent appearance of respect
cordially obey the orders of those whom but the other day in his
name they had committed to the Bastille? Will they obey the orders
of those whom, whilst they were exercising despotic justice upon them,
they conceived they were treating with lenity, and from whom, in a
prison, they thought they had provided an asylum? If you expect such
obedience amongst your other innovations and regenerations, you
ought to make a revolution in nature and provide a new constitution
for the human mind. Otherwise, your supreme government cannot
harmonize with its executory system. There are cases in which we
cannot take up with names and abstractions. You may call half a
dozen leading individuals, whom we have reason to fear and hate, the
nation. It makes no other difference than to make us fear and hate
them the more. If it had been thought justifiable and expedient to
make such a revolution by such means, and through such persons, as you
have made yours, it would have been more wise to have completed the
business of the fifth and sixth of October. The new executive
officer would then owe his situation to those who are his creators
as well as his masters; and he might be bound in interest, in the
society of crime, and (if in crimes there could be virtues) in
gratitude to serve those who had promoted him to a place of great
lucre and great sensual indulgence, and of something more; for more he
must have received from those who certainly would not have limited
an aggrandized creature, as they have done a submitting antagonist.
    A king circumstanced as the present, if he is totally stupefied by
his misfortunes so as to think it not the necessity but the premium
and privilege of life to eat and sleep, without any regard to glory,
can never be fit for the office. If he feels as men commonly feel,
he must be sensible that an office so circumstanced is one in which he
can obtain no fame or reputation. He has no generous interest that can
excite him to action. At best, his conduct will be passive and
defensive. To inferior people such an office might be matter of honor.
But to be raised to it, and to descend to it, are different things and
suggest different sentiments. Does he really name the ministers?
They will have a sympathy with him. Are they forced upon him? The
whole business between them and the nominal king will be mutual
counteraction. In all other countries, the office of ministers of
state is of the highest dignity. In France it is full of peril, and
incapable of glory. Rivals, however, they will have in their
nothingness, whilst shallow ambition exists in the world, or the
desire of a miserable salary is an incentive to short-sighted avarice.
Those competitors of the ministers are enabled by your constitution to
attack them in their vital parts, whilst they have not the means of
repelling their charges in any other than the degrading character of
culprits. The ministers of state in France are the only persons in
that country who are incapable of a share in the national councils.
What ministers! What councils! What a nation!- But they are
responsible. It is a poor service that is to be had from
responsibility. The elevation of mind to be derived from fear will
never make a nation glorious. Responsibility prevents crimes. It makes
all attempts against the laws dangerous. But for a principle of active
and zealous service, none but idiots could think of it. Is the conduct
of a war to be trusted to a man who may abhor its principle, who, in
every step he may take to render it successful, confirms the power
of those by whom he is oppressed? Will foreign states seriously
treat with him who has no prerogative of peace or war? No, not so much
as in a single vote by himself or his ministers, or by any one whom he
can possibly influence. A state of contempt is not a state for a
    I know it will be said that these humors in the court and
executive government will continue only through this generation, and
that the king has been brought to declare the dauphin shall be
educated in a conformity to his situation. If he is made to conform to
his situation, he will have no education at all. His training must
be worse, even, than that of an arbitrary monarch. If he reads-
whether he reads or not- some good or evil genius will tell him his
ancestors were kings. Thenceforward his object must be to assert
himself and to avenge his parents. This you will say is not his
duty. That may be; but it is nature; and whilst you pique nature
against you, you do unwisely to trust to duty. In this futile scheme
of polity, the state nurses in its bosom, for the present, a source of
weakness, perplexity, counteraction, inefficiency, and decay; and it
prepares the means of its final ruin. In short, I see nothing in the
executive force (I cannot call it authority) that has even an
appearance of vigor, or that has the smallest degree of just
correspondence or symmetry, or amicable relation with the supreme
power, either as it now exists or as it is planned for the future
    You have settled, by an economy as perverted as the policy, two*
establishments of government- one real, one fictitious. Both
maintained at a vast expense, but the fictitious at, I think, the
greatest. Such a machine as the latter is not worth the grease of
its wheels. The expense is exorbitant, and neither the show nor the
use deserve the tenth part of the charge. Oh! but I don't do justice
to the talents of the legislators: I don't allow, as I ought to do,
for necessity. Their scheme of executive force was not their choice.
This pageant must be kept. The people would not consent to part with
it. Right; I understand you. You do, in spite of your grand
theories, to which you would have heaven and earth to bend- you do
know how to conform yourselves to the nature and circumstances of
things. But when you were obliged to conform thus far to
circumstances, you ought to have carried your submission further,
and to have made, what you were obliged to take, a proper
instrument, and useful to its end. That was in your power. For
instance, among many others, it was in your power to leave to your
king the right of peace and war. What! to leave to the executive
magistrate the most dangerous of all prerogatives? I know none more
dangerous, nor any one more necessary to be so trusted. I do not say
that this prerogative ought to be trusted to your king unless he
enjoyed other auxiliary trusts along with it, which he does not now
hold. But if he did possess them, hazardous as they are undoubtedly,
advantages would arise from such a constitution, more than
compensating the risk. There is no other way of keeping the several
potentates of Europe from intriguing distinctly and personally with
the members of your Assembly, from intermeddling in all your concerns,
and fomenting, in the heart of your country, the most pernicious of
all factions- factions in the interest and under the direction of
foreign powers. From that worst of evils, thank God, we are still
free. Your skill, if you had any, would be well employed to find out
indirect correctives and controls upon this perilous trust. If you did
not like those which in England we have chosen, your leaders might
have exerted their abilities in contriving better. If it were
necessary to exemplify the consequences of such an executive
government as yours, in the management of great affairs, I should
refer you to the late reports of M. de Montmorin to the National
Assembly, and all the other proceedings relative to the differences
between Great Britain and Spain. It would be treating your
understanding with disrespect to point them out to you.
    * In reality three, to reckon the provincial republican
    I hear that the persons who are called ministers have signified an
intention of resigning their places. I am rather astonished that
they have not resigned long since. For the universe I would not have
stood in the situation in which they have been for this last
twelvemonth. They wished well, I take it for granted, to the
revolution. Let this fact be as it may, they could not, placed as they
were upon an eminence, though an eminence of humiliation, but be the
first to see collectively, and to feel each in his own department, the
evils which have been produced by that revolution. In every step which
they took, or forbore to take, they must have felt the degraded
situation of their country and their utter incapacity of serving it.
They are in a species of subordinate servitude, in which no men before
them were ever seen. Without confidence from their sovereign, on
whom they were forced, or from the Assembly, who forced them upon him,
all the noble functions of their office are executed by committees
of the Assembly without any regard whatsoever to their personal or
their official authority. They are to execute, without power; they are
to be responsible, without discretion; they are to deliberate, without
choice. In their puzzled situations, under two sovereigns, over
neither of whom they have any influence, they must act in such a
manner as (in effect, whatever they may intend) sometimes to betray
the one, sometimes the other, and always to betray themselves. Such
has been their situation, such must be the situation of those who
succeed them. I have much respect and many good wishes for M.
Necker. I am obliged to him for attentions. I thought, when his
enemies had driven him from Versailles, that his exile was a subject
of most serious congratulations- sed multae urbes et publica vota
vicerunt. He is now sitting on the ruins of the finances and of the
    A great deal more might be observed on the strange constitution of
the executory part of the new government, but fatigue must give bounds
to the discussion of subjects which in themselves have hardly any
    AS little genius and talent am I able to perceive in the plan of
judicature formed by the National Assembly. According to their
invariable course, the framers of your constitution have begun with
the utter abolition of the parliaments. These venerable bodies, like
the rest of the old government, stood in need of reform, even though
there should be no change made in the monarchy. They required
several more alterations to adapt them to the system of a free
constitution. But they had particulars in their constitution, and
those not a few, which deserved approbation from the wise. They
possessed one fundamental excellence: they were independent. The
most doubtful circumstance attendant on their office, that of its
being vendible, contributed however to this independence of character.
They held for life. Indeed, they may be said to have held by
inheritance. Appointed by the monarch, they were considered as
nearly out of his power. The most determined exertions of that
authority against them only showed their radical independence. They
composed permanent bodies politic, constituted to resist arbitrary
innovation; and from that corporate constitution, and from most of
their forms, they were well calculated to afford both certainty and
stability to the laws. They had been a safe asylum to secure these
laws in all the revolutions of humor and opinion. They had saved
that sacred deposit of the country during the reigns of arbitrary
princes and the struggles of arbitrary factions. They kept alive the
memory and record of the constitution. They were the great security to
private property which might be said (when personal liberty had no
existence) to be, in fact, as well guarded in France as in any other
country. Whatever is supreme in a state ought to have, as much as
possible, its judicial authority so constituted as not only not to
depend upon it, but in some sort to balance it. It ought to give a
security to its justice against its power. It ought to make its
judicature, as it were, something exterior to the state.
    These parliaments had furnished, not the best certainly, but
some considerable corrective to the excesses and vices of the
monarchy. Such an independent judicature was ten times more
necessary when a democracy became the absolute power of the country.
In that constitution, elective temporary, local judges, such as you
have contrived, exercising their dependent functions in a narrow
society, must be the worst of all tribunals. In them it will be vain
to look for any appearance of justice toward strangers, toward the
obnoxious rich, toward the minority of routed parties, toward all
those who in the election have supported unsuccessful candidates. It
will be impossible to keep the new tribunals clear of the worst spirit
of faction. All contrivances by ballot we know experimentally to be
vain and childish to prevent a discovery of inclinations. Where they
may the best answer the purposes of concealment, they answer to
produce suspicion, and this is a still more mischievous cause of
    If the parliaments had been preserved, instead of being
dissolved at so ruinous a charge to the nation, they might have served
in this new commonwealth, perhaps not precisely the same (I do not
mean an exact parallel), but nearly the same, purposes as the court
and senate of Areopagus did in Athens; that is, as one of the balances
and correctives to the evils of a light and unjust democracy. Every
one knows that this tribunal was the great stay of that state; every
one knows with what care it was upheld, and with what a religious
awe it was consecrated. The parliaments were not wholly free from
faction, I admit; but this evil was exterior and accidental, and not
so much the vice of their constitution itself, as it must be in your
new contrivance of sexennial elective judicatories. Several English
commend the abolition of the old tribunals, as supposing that they
determined everything by bribery and corruption. But they have stood
the test of monarchic and republican scrutiny. The court was well
disposed to prove corruption on those bodies when the were dissolved
in 1771. Those who have again dissolved them would have done the
same if they could, but both inquisitions having failed, I conclude
that gross pecuniary corruption must have been rather rare amongst
    It would have been prudent, along with the parliaments, to
preserve their ancient power of registering, and of remonstrating at
least upon, all the decrees of the National Assembly, as they did upon
those which passed in the time of the monarchy. It would be a means of
squaring the occasional decrees of a democracy to some principles of
general jurisprudence. The vice of the ancient democracies, and one
cause of their ruin, was that they ruled, as you do, by occasional
decrees, psephismata. This practice soon broke in upon the tenor and
consistency of the laws; it abated the respect of the people toward
    Your vesting the power of remonstrance, which, in the time of
the monarchy, existed in the parliament of Paris, in your principal
executive officer, whom, in spite of common sense, you persevere in
calling king, is the height of absurdity. You ought never to suffer
remonstrance from him who is to execute. This is to understand neither
council nor execution, neither authority nor obedience. The person
whom you call king ought not to have this power, or he ought to have
    Your present arrangement is strictly judicial. Instead of
imitating your monarchy and seating your judges on a bench of
independence, your object is to reduce them to the most blind
obedience. As you have changed all things, you have invented new
principles of order. You first appoint judges, who, I suppose, are
to determine according to law, and then you let them know that, at
some time or other, you intend to give them some law by which they are
to determine. Any studies which they have made (if any they have made)
are to be useless to them. But to supply these studies, they are to be
sworn to obey all the rules, orders, and instructions which from
time to time they are to receive from the National Assembly. These
if they submit to, they leave no ground of law to the subject. They
become complete and most dangerous instruments in the hands of the
governing power which, in the midst of a cause or on the prospect of
it, may wholly change the rule of decision. If these orders of the
National Assembly come to be contrary to the will of the people, who
locally choose judges, such confusion must happen as is terrible to
think of. For the judges owe their places to the local authority,
and the commands they are sworn to obey come from those who have no
share in their appointment. In the meantime they have the example of
the court of Chatelet to encourage and guide them in the exercise of
their functions. That court is to try criminals sent to it by the
National Assembly, or brought before it by other courses of
delation. They sit under a guard to save their own lives. They know
not by what law they judge, nor under what authority they act, nor
by what tenure they hold. It is thought that they are sometimes
obliged to condemn at peril of their lives. This is not perhaps
certain, nor can it be ascertained; but when they acquit, we know they
have seen the persons whom they discharge, with perfect impunity to
    The Assembly indeed promises that they will form a body of law,
which shall be short, simple, clear, and so forth. That is, by their
short laws they will leave much to the discretion of the judge, whilst
they have exploded the authority of all the learning which could
make judicial discretion (a thing perilous at best) deserving the
    It is curious to observe that the administrative bodies are
carefully exempted from the jurisdiction of these new tribunals.
That is, those persons are exempted from the power of the laws who
ought to be the most entirely submitted to them. Those who execute
public pecuniary trusts ought of all men to be the most strictly
held to their duty. One would have thought that it must have been
among your earliest cares, if you did not mean that those
administrative bodies should be real, sovereign, independent states,
to form an awful tribunal, like your late parliaments, or like our
king's bench, where all corporate officers might obtain protection
in the legal exercise of their functions, and would find coercion if
they trespassed against their legal duty. But the cause of the
exemption is plain. These administrative bodies are the great
instruments of the present leaders in their progress through democracy
to oligarchy. They must, therefore, be put above the law. It will be
said that the legal tribunals which you have made are unfit to
coerce them. They are, undoubtedly. They are unfit for any rational
purpose. It will be said, too, that the administrative bodies will
be accountable to the General Assembly. This I fear is talking without
much consideration of the nature of that Assembly, or of these
corporations. However, to be subject to the pleasure of that
Assembly is not to be subject to law either for protection or for
    This establishment of judges as yet wants something to its
completion. It is to be crowned by a new tribunal. This is to be a
grand state judicature, and it is to judge of crimes committed against
the nation, that is, against the power of the Assembly. It seems as if
they had something in their view of the nature of the high court of
justice erected in England during the time of the great usurpation. As
they have not yet finished this part of the scheme, it is impossible
to form a right judgment upon it. However, if great care is not
taken to form it in a spirit very different from that which has guided
them in their proceedings relative to state offenses, this tribunal,
subservient to their inquisition, the Committee of Research, will
extinguish the last sparks of liberty in France and settle the most
dreadful and arbitrary tyranny ever known in any nation. If they
wish to give to this tribunal any appearance of liberty and justice,
they must not evoke from or send to it the causes relative to their
own members, at their pleasure. They must also remove the seat of that
    * For further elucidations upon the subject of all these
judicatures, and of the committee of research, see M. de Calonne's
    HAS more wisdom been displayed in the constitution of your army
than what is discoverable in your plan of judicature? The able
arrangement of this part is the more difficult, and requires the
greatest skill and attention, not only as the great concern in itself,
but as it is the third cementing principle in the new body of
republics which you call the French nation. Truly it is not easy to
divine what that army may become at last. You have voted a very
large one, and on good appointments, at least fully equal to your
apparent means of payment. But what is the principle of its
discipline, or whom is it to obey? You have got the wolf by the
ears, and I wish you joy of the happy position in which you have
chosen to place yourselves, and in which you are well circumstanced
for a free deliberation relatively to that army or to anything else.
    The minister and secretary of state for the war department is M.
de la Tour du Pin. This gentleman, like his colleagues in
administration, is a most zealous assertor of the revolution, and a
sanguine admirer of the new constitution which originated in that
event. His statement of facts, relative to the military of France,
is important, not only from his official and personal authority, but
because it displays very clearly the actual condition of the army in
France, and because it throws light on the principles upon which the
Assembly proceeds in the administration of this critical object. It
may enable us to form some judgment how far it may be expedient in
this country to imitate the martial policy of France.
    M. de la Tour du Pin, on the fourth of last June, comes to give an
account of the state of his department as it exists under the auspices
of the National Assembly. No man knows it so well; no man can
express it better. Addressing himself to the National Assembly, he
    His Majesty has this day sent me to apprise you of the
multiplied disorders of which every day he receives the most
distressing intelligence. The army (le corps militaire) threatens to
fall into the most turbulent anarchy. Entire regiments have dared to
violate at once the respect due to the laws, to the king, to the order
established by your decrees, and to the oaths which they have taken
with the most awful solemnity. Compelled by my duty to give you
information of these excesses, my heart bleeds when I consider who
they are that have committed them. Those against whom it is not in
my power to withhold the most grievous complaints are a part of that
very soldiery which to this day have been so full of honor and
loyalty, and with whom, for fifty years, I have lived the comrade
    What incomprehensible spirit of delirium and delusion has all at
once led them astray? Whilst you are indefatigable in establishing
uniformity in the empire, and molding the whole into one coherent
and consistent body; whilst the French are taught by you at once the
respect which the laws owe to the rights of man, and that which the
citizens owe to the laws, the administration of the army presents
nothing but disturbance and confusion. I see in more than one corps
the bonds of discipline relaxed or broken; the most unheard-of
pretensions avowed directly and without any disguise; the ordinances
without force; the chiefs without authority; the military chest and
the colors carried off; the authority of the king himself (risum
teneatis?) proudly defied; the officers despised, degraded,
threatened, driven away, and some of them prisoners in the midst of
their corps, dragging on a precarious life in the bosom of disgust and
humiliation. To fill up the measure of all these horrors, the
commandants of places have had their throats cut, under the eyes and
    These evils are great; but they are not the worst consequences
which may be produced by such military insurrections. Sooner or
later they may menace the nation itself. The nature of things requires
that the army should never act but as an instrument. The moment
that, erecting itself into a deliberative body, it shall act according
to its own resolutions, the government, be it what it may, will
immediately degenerate into a military democracy- a species of
political monster which has always ended by devouring those who have
    After all this, who must not be alarmed at the irregular
consultations and turbulent committees formed in some regiments by the
common soldiers and non-commissioned officers without the knowledge,
or even in contempt of the authority, of their superiors, although the
presence and concurrence of those superiors could give no authority to
    It is not necessary to add much to this finished picture- finished
as far as its canvas admits, but, as I apprehend, not taking in the
whole of the nature and complexity of the disorders of this military
democracy which, the minister at war truly and wisely observes,
wherever it exists must be the true constitution of the state, by
whatever formal appellation it may pass. For though he informs the
Assembly that the more considerable part of the army have not cast off
their obedience, but are still attached to their duty, yet those
travelers who have seen the corps whose conduct is the best rather
observe in them the absence of mutiny than the existence of
    I cannot help pausing here for a moment to reflect upon the
expressions of surprise which this minister has let fall, relative
to the excesses he relates. To him the departure of the troops from
their ancient principles of loyalty and honor seems quite
inconceivable. Surely those to whom he addresses himself know the
causes of it but too well. They know the doctrines which they have
preached, the decrees which they have passed, the practices which they
have countenanced. The soldiers remember the 6th of October. They
recollect the French guards. They have not forgotten the taking of the
king's castles in Paris and Marseilles. That the governors in both
places were murdered with impunity is a fact that has not passed out
of their minds. They do not abandon the principles laid down so
ostentatiously and laboriously of the equality of men. They cannot
shut their eyes to the degradation of the whole noblesse of France and
the suppression of the very idea of a gentleman. The total abolition
of titles and distinctions is not lost upon them. But M. de la Tour du
Pin is astonished at their disloyalty, when the doctors of the
Assembly have taught them at the same time the respect due to laws. It
is easy to judge which of the two sorts of lessons men with arms in
their hands are likely to learn. As to the authority of the king, we
may collect from the minister himself (if any argument on that head
were not quite superfluous) that it is not of more consideration
with these troops than it is with everybody else. "The king", says he,
"has over and over again repeated his orders to put a stop to these
excesses; but in so terrible a crisis your (the Assembly's)
concurrence is become indispensably necessary to prevent the evils
which menace the state. You unite to the force of the legislative
power that of opinion still more important". To be sure the army can
have no opinion of the power or authority of the king. Perhaps the
soldier has by this time learned that the Assembly itself does not
enjoy a much greater degree of liberty than that royal figure.
    It is now to be seen what has been proposed in this exigency,
one of the greatest that can happen in a state. The minister
requests the Assembly to array itself in all its terrors, and to
call forth all its majesty. He desires that the grave and severe
principles announced by them may give vigor to the king's
proclamation. After this we should have looked for courts, civil and
martial, breaking of some corps, decimating of others, and all the
terrible means which necessity has employed in such cases to arrest
the progress of the most terrible of all evils; particularly, one
might expect that a serious inquiry would be made into the murder of
commandants in the view of their soldiers. Not one word of all this or
of anything like it. After they had been told that the soldiery
trampled upon the decrees of the Assembly promulgated by the king, the
Assembly pass new decrees, and they authorize the king to make new
proclamations. After the secretary at war had stated that the
regiments had paid no regard to oaths pretes avec la plus imposante
solemnite, they propose- what? More oaths. They renew decrees and
proclamations as they experience their insufficiency, and they
multiply oaths in proportion as they weaken in the minds of men, the
sanctions of religion. I hope that handy abridgments of the
excellent sermons of Voltaire, d'Alembert, Diderot, and Helvetius,
on the Immortality of the Soul, on a particular superintending
Providence, and on a Future State of Rewards and Punishments are
sent down to the soldiers along with their civic oaths. Of this I have
no doubt; as I understand that a certain description of reading
makes no inconsiderable part of their military exercises, and that
they are full as well supplied with the ammunition of pamphlets as
    To prevent the mischiefs arising from conspiracies, irregular
consultations, seditious committees, and monstrous democratic
assemblies (comitia, comices) of the soldiers, and all the disorders
arising from idleness, luxury, dissipation, and insubordination, I
believe the most astonishing means have been used that ever occurred
to men, even in all the inventions of this prolific age. It is no less
than this: the king has promulgated in circular letters to all the
regiments his direct authority and encouragement that the several
corps should join themselves with the clubs and confederations in
the several municipalities, and mix with them in their feasts and
civic entertainments! This jolly discipline, it seems, is to soften
the ferocity of their minds, to reconcile them to their bottle
companions of other descriptions, and to merge particular conspiracies
in more general associations.* That this remedy would be pleasing to
the soldiers, as they are described by M. de la Tour du Pin, I can
readily believe; and that, however mutinous otherwise, they will
dutifully submit themselves to these royal proclamations. But I should
question whether all this civic swearing, clubbing, and feasting would
dispose them, more than at present they are disposed, to an
obedience to their officers, or teach them better to submit to the
austere rules of military discipline. It will make them admirable
citizens after the French mode, but not quite so good soldiers after
any mode. A doubt might well arise whether the conversations at
these good tables would fit them a great deal the better for the
character of mere instruments, which this veteran officer and
statesman justly observes the nature of things always requires an army
    * Comme sa Majeste y a reconnu, non une systeme d'associations
particulieres, mais une reunion de volontes de tous les Francois
pour la liberte et la prosperite communes, ainsi pour la maintien de
l'ordre publique; il a pense qu'il convenoit que chaque regiment
prit part a ces fetes civiques pour multiplier les rapports et
reserrer les liens d'union entre les citoyens et les troupes.- Lest
I should not be credited, I insert the words, authorizing the troops
    Concerning the likelihood of this improvement in discipline by the
free conversation of the soldiers with municipal festive societies,
which is thus officially encouraged by royal authority and sanction,
we may judge by the state of the municipalities themselves,
furnished to us by the war minister in this very speech. He
conceives good hopes of the success of his endeavors toward
restoring order for the present from the good disposition of certain
regiments, but he finds something cloudy with regard to the future. As
to preventing the return of confusion, for this the administration
(says he) cannot be answerable to you as long as they see the
municipalities arrogate to themselves an authority over the troops
which your institutions have reserved wholly to the monarch. You
have fixed the limits of the military authority and the municipal
authority. You have bounded the action which you have permitted to the
latter over the former to the right of requisition, but never did
the letter or the spirit of your decrees authorize the commons in
these municipalities to break the officers, to try them, to give
orders to the soldiers, to drive them from the posts committed to
their guard, to stop them in their marches ordered by the king, or, in
a word, to enslave the troops to the caprice of each of the cities
or even market towns through which they are to pass.
    Such is the character and disposition of the municipal society
which is to reclaim the soldiery, to bring them back to the true
principles of military subordination, and to render them machines in
the hands of the supreme power of the country! Such are the distempers
of the French troops! Such is their cure! As the army is, so is the
navy. The municipalities supersede the orders of the Assembly, and the
seamen in their turn supersede the orders of the municipalities.
From my heart I pity the condition of a respectable servant of the
public like this war minister, obliged in his old age to pledge the
Assembly in their civic cups, and to enter with a hoary head into
all the fantastic vagaries of these juvenile politicians. Such schemes
are not like propositions coming from a man of fifty years' wear and
tear amongst mankind. They seem rather such as ought to be expected
from those grand compounders in politics who shorten the road to their
degrees in the state and have a certain inward fanatical assurance and
illumination upon all subjects, upon the credit of which one of
their doctors has thought fit, with great applause, and greater
success, to caution the Assembly not to attend to old men or to any
persons who valued themselves upon their experience. I suppose all the
ministers of state must qualify and take this test- wholly abjuring
the errors and heresies of experience and observation. Every man has
his own relish. But I think if I could not attain to the wisdom, I
would at least preserve something of the stiff and peremptory
dignity of age. These gentlemen deal in regeneration; but at any price
I should hardly yield my rigid fibers to be regenerated by them, nor
begin, in my grand climacteric, to squall in their new accents or to
stammer, in my second cradle, the elemental sounds of their
barbarous metaphysics.* Si isti mihi largiantur ut repuerascam, et
    * This war minister has since quitted the school and resigned
    The imbecility of any part of the puerile and pedantic system,
which they call a constitution, cannot be laid open without
discovering the utter insufficiency and mischief of every other part
with which it comes in contact, or that bears any the remotest
relation to it. You cannot propose a remedy for the incompetence of
the crown without displaying the debility of the Assembly. You
cannot deliberate on the confusion of the army of the state without
disclosing the worse disorders of the armed municipalities. The
military lays open the civil, and the civil betrays the military,
anarchy. I wish everybody carefully to peruse the eloquent speech
(such it is) of M. de la Tour du Pin. He attributes the salvation of
the municipalities to the good behavior of some of the troops. These
troops are to preserve the well-disposed part of those municipalities,
which is confessed to be the weakest, from the pillage of the
worst-disposed, which is the strongest. But the municipalities
affect a sovereignty and will command those troops which are necessary
for their protection. Indeed they must command them or court them. The
municipalities, by the necessity of their situation, and by the
republican powers they have obtained, must, with relation to the
military, be the masters, or the servants, or the confederates, or
each successively; or they must make a jumble of all together,
according to circumstances. What government is there to coerce the
army but the municipality, or the municipality but the army? To
preserve concord where authority is extinguished, at the hazard of all
consequences, the Assembly attempts to cure the distempers by the
distempers themselves; and they hope to preserve themselves from a
purely military democracy by giving it a debauched interest in the
    If the soldiers once come to mix for any time in the municipal
clubs, cabals, and confederacies, an elective attraction will draw
them to the lowest and most desperate part. With them will be their
habits, affections, and sympathies. The military conspiracies, which
are to be remedied by civic confederacies; the rebellious
municipalities, which are to be rendered obedient by furnishing them
with the means of seducing the very armies of the state that are to
keep them in order; all these chimeras of a monstrous and portentous
policy must aggravate the confusion from which they have arisen. There
must be blood. The want of common judgment manifested in the
construction of all their descriptions of forces and in all their
kinds of civil and judicial authorities will make it flow. Disorders
may be quieted in one time and in one part. They will break out in
others, because the evil is radical and intrinsic. All these schemes
of mixing mutinous soldiers with seditious citizens must weaken
still more and more the military connection of soldiers with their
officers, as well as add military and mutinous audacity to turbulent
artificers and peasants. To secure a real army, the officer should
be first and last in the eye of the soldier; first and last in his
attention, observance, and esteem. Officers it seems there are to
be, whose chief qualification must be temper and patience. They are to
manage their troops by electioneering arts. They must bear
themselves as candidates, not as commanders. But as by such means
power may be occasionally in their hands, the authority by which
they are to be nominated becomes of high importance.
    What you may do finally does not appear, nor is it of much
moment whilst the strange and contradictory relation between your army
and all the parts of your republic, as well as the puzzled relation of
those parts to each other and to the whole, remain as they are. You
seem to have given the provisional nomination of the officers in the
first instance to the king, with a reserve of approbation by the
National Assembly. Men who have an interest to pursue are extremely
sagacious in discovering the true seat of power. They must soon
perceive that those who can negative indefinitely in reality
appoint. The officers must, therefore, look to their intrigues in that
Assembly as the sole certain road to promotion. Still, however, by
your new constitution they must begin their solicitation at court.
This double negotiation for military rank seems to me a contrivance as
well adapted, as if it were studied for no other end, to promote
faction in the Assembly itself, relative to this vast military
patronage, and then to poison the corps of officers with factions of a
nature still more dangerous to the safety of government, upon any
bottom on which it can be placed, and destructive in the end to the
efficiency of the army itself. Those officers who lose the
promotions intended for them by the crown must become of a faction
opposite to that of the Assembly, which has rejected their claims, and
must nourish discontents in the heart of the army against the ruling
powers. Those officers, on the other hand, who, by carrying their
point through an interest in the Assembly, feel themselves to be at
best only second in the good will of the crown, though first in that
of the Assembly, must slight an authority which would not advance
and could not retard their promotion. If to avoid these evils you will
have no other rule for command or promotion than seniority, you will
have an army of formality; at the same time it will become more
independent and more of a military republic. Not they, but the king is
the machine. A king is not to be deposed by halves. If he is not
everything in the command of an army, he is nothing. What is the
effect of a power placed nominally at the head of the army who to that
army is no object of gratitude or of fear? Such a cipher is not fit
for the administration of an object, of all things the most
delicate, the supreme command of military men. They must be
constrained (and their inclinations lead them to what their
necessities require) by a real, vigorous, effective, decided, personal
authority. The authority of the Assembly itself suffers by passing
through such a debilitating channel as they have chosen. The army will
not long look to an assembly acting through the organ of false show
and palpable imposition. They will not seriously yield obedience to
a prisoner. They will either despise a pageant, or they will pity a
captive king. This relation of your army to the crown will, if I am
not greatly mistaken, become a serious dilemma in your politics.
    It is, besides, to be considered whether an assembly like yours,
even supposing that it was in possession of another sort of organ
through which its orders were to pass, is fit for promoting the
obedience and discipline of an army. It is known that armies have
hitherto yielded a very precarious and uncertain obedience to any
senate or popular authority; and they will least of all yield it to an
assembly which is only to have a continuance of two years. The
officers must totally lose the characteristic disposition of
military men if they see with perfect submission and due admiration
the dominion of pleaders; especially when they find that they have a
new court to pay to an endless succession of those pleaders, whose
military policy, and the genius of whose command (if they should
have any), must be as uncertain as their duration is transient. In the
weakness of one kind of authority, and in the fluctuation of all,
the officers of an army will remain for some time mutinous and full of
faction until some popular general, who understands the art of
conciliating the soldiery, and who possesses the true spirit of
command, shall draw the eyes of all men upon himself. Armies will obey
him on his personal account. There is no other way of securing
military obedience in this state of things. But the moment in which
that event shall happen, the person who really commands the army is
your master- the master (that is little) of your king, the master of
    How came the Assembly by their present power over the army?
Chiefly, to be sure, by debauching the soldiers from their officers.
They have begun by a most terrible operation. They have touched the
central point about which the particles that compose armies are at
repose. They have destroyed the principle of obedience in the great,
essential, critical link between the officer and the soldier, just
where the chain of military subordination commences and on which the
whole of that system depends. The soldier is told he is a citizen
and has the rights of man and citizen. The right of a man, he is told,
is to be his own governor and to be ruled only by those to whom he
delegates that self-government. It is very natural he should think
that he ought most of all to have his choice where he is to yield
the greatest degree of obedience. He will therefore, in all
probability, systematically do what he does at present occasionally;
that is, he will exercise at least a negative in the choice of his
officers. At present the officers are known at best to be only
permissive, and on their good behavior. In fact, there have been
many instances in which they have been cashiered by their corps.
Here is a second negative on the choice of the king- a negative as
effectual at least as the other of the Assembly. The soldiers know
already that it has been a question, not ill received in the
National Assembly, whether they ought not to have the direct choice of
their officers, or some proportion of them? When such matters are in
deliberation it is no extravagant supposition that they will incline
to the opinion most favorable to their pretensions. They will not bear
to be deemed the army of an imprisoned king whilst another army in the
same country, with whom, too, they are to feast and confederate, is to
be considered as the free army of a free constitution. They will
cast their eyes on the other and more permanent army; I mean the
municipal. That corps, they well know, does actually elect its own
officers. They may not be able to discern the grounds of distinction
on which they are not to elect a Marquis de la Fayette (or what is his
new name?) of their own. If this election of a commander-in-chief be a
part of the rights of men, why not of theirs? They see elective
justices of peace, elective judges, elective curates, elective
bishops, elective municipalities, and elective commanders of the
Parisian army- why should they alone be excluded? Are the brave troops
of France the only men in that nation who are not the fit judges of
military merit and of the qualifications necessary for a
commander-in-chief? Are they paid by the state and do they, therefore,
lose the rights of men? They are a part of that nation themselves
and contribute to that pay. And is not the king, is not the National
Assembly, and are not all who elect the National Assembly, likewise
paid? Instead of seeing all these forfeit their rights by their
receiving a salary, they perceive that in all these cases a salary
is given for the exercise of those rights. All your resolutions, all
your proceedings, all your debates, all the works of your doctors in
religion and politics have industriously been put into their hands,
and you expect that they will apply to their own case just as much
of your doctrines and examples as suits your pleasure.
    EVERYTHING depends upon the army in such a government as yours,
for you have industriously destroyed all the opinions and prejudices
and, as far as in you lay, all the instincts which support government.
Therefore, the moment any difference arises between your National
Assembly and any part of the nation, you must have recourse to
force. Nothing else is left to you, or rather you have left nothing
else to yourselves. You see, by the report of your war minister,
that the distribution of the army is in a great measure made with a
view of internal coercion.* You must rule by an army; and you have
infused into that army by which you rule, as well as into the whole
body of the nation, principles which after a time must disable you
in the use you resolve to make of it. The king is to call out troops
to act against his people, when the world has been told, and the
assertion is still ringing in our ears, that troops ought not to
fire on citizens. The colonies assert to themselves an independent
constitution and a free trade. They must be constrained by troops.
In what chapter of your code of the rights of men are they able to
read that it is a part of the rights of men to have their commerce
monopolized and restrained for the benefit of others? As the colonists
rise on you, the Negroes rise on them. Troops again- massacre,
torture, hanging! These are your rights of men! These are the fruits
of metaphysic declarations wantonly made, and shamefully retracted! It
was but the other day that the farmers of land in one of your
provinces refused to pay some sort of rents to the lord of the soil.
In consequence of this, you decree that the country people shall pay
all rents and dues, except those which as grievances you have
abolished; and if they refuse, then you order the king to march troops
against them. You lay down metaphysic propositions which infer
universal consequences, and then you attempt to limit logic by
despotism. The leaders of the present system tell them of their
rights, as men, to take fortresses, to murder guards, to seize on
kings without the least appearance of authority even from the
Assembly, whilst, as the sovereign legislative body, that Assembly was
sitting in the name of the nation- and yet these leaders presume to
order out the troops which have acted in these very disorders, to
coerce those who shall judge on the principles, and follow the
examples, which have been guaranteed by their own approbation.
    * Courier Francois, 30th July, 1790. Assemblee Nationale, Numero
    The leaders teach the people to abhor and reject all feudality
as the barbarism of tyranny, and they tell them afterwards how much of
that barbarous tyranny they are to bear with patience. As they are
prodigal of light with regard to grievances, so the people find them
sparing in the extreme with regard to redress. They know that not only
certain quitrents and personal duties, which you have permitted them
to redeem (but have furnished no money for the redemption), are as
nothing to those burdens for which you have made no provision at
all. They know that almost the whole system of landed property in
its origin is feudal; that it is the distribution of the possessions
of the original proprietors, made by a barbarous conqueror to his
barbarous instruments; and that the most grievous effects of the
conquest are the land rents of every kind, as without question they
    The peasants, in all probability, are the descendants of these
ancient proprietors, Romans or Gauls. But if they fail, in any degree,
in the titles which they make on the principles of antiquaries and
lawyers, they retreat into the citadel of the rights of men. There
they find that men are equal; and the earth, the kind and equal mother
of all, ought not to be monopolized to foster the pride and luxury
of any men, who by nature are no better than themselves, and who, if
they do not labor for their bread, are worse. They find that by the
laws of nature the occupant and subduer of the soil is the true
proprietor; that there is no prescription against nature; and that the
agreements (where any there are) which have been made with the
landlords, during the time of slavery, are only the effect of duress
and force; and that when the people reentered into the rights of
men, those agreements were made as void as everything else which had
been settled under the prevalence of the old feudal and aristocratic
tyranny. They will tell you that they see no difference between an
idler with a hat and a national cockade and an idler in a cowl or in a
rochet. If you ground the title to rents on succession and
prescription, they tell you from the speech of M. Camus, published
by the National Assembly for their information, that things ill
begun cannot avail themselves of prescription; that the title of these
lords was vicious in its origin; and that force is at least as bad
as fraud. As to the title by succession, they will tell you that the
succession of those who have cultivated the soil is the true
pedigree of property, and not rotten parchments and silly
substitutions; that the lords have enjoyed their usurpation too
long; and that if they allow to these lay monks any charitable
pension, they ought to be thankful to the bounty of the true
proprietor, who is so generous toward a false claimant to his goods.
    When the peasants give you back that coin of sophistic reason on
which you have set your image and superscription, you cry it down as
base money and tell them you will pay for the future with French
guards, and dragoons, and hussars. You hold up, to chastise them,
the second-hand authority of a king, who is only the instrument of
destroying, without any power of protecting either the people or his
own person. Through him it seems you will make yourselves obeyed. They
answer: You have taught us that there are no gentlemen, and which of
your principles teach us to bow to kings whom we have not elected?
We know without your teaching that lands were given for the support of
feudal dignities, feudal titles, and feudal offices. When you took
down the cause as a grievance, why should the more grievous effect
remain? As there are now no hereditary honors, and no distinguished
families, why are we taxed to maintain what you tell us ought not to
exist? You have sent down our old aristocratic landlords in no other
character, and with no other title, but that of exactors under your
authority. Have you endeavored to make these your rent-gatherers
respectable to us? No. You have sent them to us with their arms
reversed, their shields broken, their impresses defaced; and so
displumed, degraded, and metamorphosed, such unfeathered two-legged
things, that we no longer know them. They are strangers to us. They do
not even go by the names of our ancient lords. Physically they may
be the same men, though we are not quite sure of that, on your new
philosophic doctrines of personal identity. In all other respects they
are totally changed. We do not see why we have not as good a right
to refuse them their rents as you have to abrogate all their honors,
titles, and distinctions. This we have never commissioned you to do;
and it is one instance, among many indeed, of your assumption of
undelegated power. We see the burghers of Paris, through their
clubs, their mobs, and their national guards, directing you at their
pleasure and giving that as law to you which, under your authority, is
transmitted as law to us. Through you these burghers dispose of the
lives and fortunes of us all. Why should not you attend as much to the
desires of the laborious husbandman with regard to our rent, by
which we are affected in the most serious manner, as you do to the
demands of these insolent burghers, relative to distinctions and
titles of honor, by which neither they nor we are affected at all? But
we find you pay more regard to their fancies than to our
necessities. Is it among the rights of man to pay tribute to his
equals? Before this measure of yours, we might have thought we were
not perfectly equal. We might have entertained some old, habitual,
unmeaning prepossession in favor of those landlords; but we cannot
conceive with what other view than that of destroying all respect to
them, you could have made the law that degrades them. You have
forbidden us to treat them with any of the old formalities of respect,
and now you send troops to saber and to bayonet us into a submission
to fear and force, which you did not suffer us to yield to the mild
    The ground of some of these arguments is horrid and ridiculous
to all rational ears, but to the politicians of metaphysics who have
opened schools for sophistry and made establishments for anarchy, it
is solid and conclusive. It is obvious that, on a mere consideration
of the right, the leaders in the Assembly would not in the least
have scrupled to abrogate the rents along with the title and family
ensigns. It would be only to follow up the principle of their
reasonings and to complete the analogy of their conduct. But they
had newly possessed themselves of a great body of landed property by
confiscation. They had this commodity at market; and the market
would have been wholly destroyed if they were to permit the husbandmen
to riot in the speculations with which they so freely intoxicated
themselves. The only security which property enjoys in any one of
its descriptions is from the interests of their rapacity with regard
to some other. They have left nothing but their own arbitrary pleasure
to determine what property is to be protected and what subverted.
    Neither have they left any principle by which any of their
municipalities can be bound to obedience, or even conscientiously
obliged not to separate from the whole to become independent, or to
connect itself with some other state. The people of Lyons, it seems,
have refused lately to pay taxes. Why should they not? What lawful
authority is there left to exact them? The king imposed some of
them. The old states, methodized by orders, settled the more
ancient. They may say to the Assembly: who are you, that are not our
kings, nor the states we have elected, nor sit on the principles on
which we have elected you? And who are we, that when we see the
gabelles, which you have ordered to be paid, wholly shaken off, when
we see the act of disobedience afterwards ratified by yourselves-
who are we, that we are not to judge what taxes we ought or ought
not to pay, and are not to avail ourselves of the same powers, the
validity of which you have approved in others? To this the answer
is, We will send troops. The last reason of kings is always the
first with your Assembly. This military aid may serve for a time,
whilst the impression of the increase of pay remains, and the vanity
of being umpires in all disputes is flattered. But this weapon will
snap short, unfaithful to the hand that employs it. The Assembly
keep a school where, systematically, and with unremitting
perseverance, they teach principles and form regulations destructive
to all spirit of subordination, civil and military- and then they
expect that they shall hold in obedience an anarchic people by an
    The municipal army which, according to the new policy, is to
balance this national army, if considered in itself only, is of a
constitution much more simple, and in every respect less
exceptionable. It is a mere democratic body, unconnected with the
crown or the kingdom, armed and trained and officered at the
pleasure of the districts to which the corps severally belong, and the
personal service of the individuals who compose, or the fine in lieu
of personal service, are directed by the same authority.* Nothing is
more uniform. If, however, considered in any relation to the crown, to
the National Assembly, to the public tribunals, or to the other
army, or considered in a view to any coherence or connection between
its parts, it seems a monster, and can hardly fail to terminate its
perplexed movements in some great national calamity. It is a worse
preservative of a general constitution than the systasis of Crete,
or the confederation of Poland, or any other ill-devised corrective
which has yet been imagined in the necessities produced by an
    * I see by M. Necker's account that the national guards of Paris
have received, over and above the money levied within their own
city, about L145,000 sterling out of the public treasures. Whether
this be an actual payment for the nine months of their existence or an
estimate of their yearly charge, I do not clearly perceive. It is of
no great importance, as certainly they may take whatever they please.
    Having concluded my few remarks on the constitution of the supreme
power, the executive, the judicature, the military, and on the
reciprocal relation of all these establishments, I shall say something
of the ability shown by your legislators with regard to the revenue.
    IN THEIR PROCEEDINGS relative to this object, if possible, still
fewer traces appear of political judgment or financial resource.
When the states met, it seemed to be the great object to improve the
system of revenue, to enlarge its collection, to cleanse it of
oppression and vexation, and to establish it on the most solid
footing. Great were the expectations entertained on that head
throughout Europe. It was by this grand arrangement that France was to
stand or fall; and this became, in my opinion, very properly the
test by which the skill and patriotism of those who ruled in that
Assembly would be tried. The revenue of the state is the state. In
effect, all depends upon it, whether for support or for reformation.
The dignity of every occupation wholly depends upon the quantity and
the kind of virtue that may be exerted in it. As all great qualities
of the mind which operate in public, and are not merely suffering
and passive, require force for their display, I had almost said for
their unequivocal existence, the revenue, which is the spring of all
power, becomes in its administration the sphere of every active
virtue. Public virtue, being of a nature magnificent and splendid,
instituted for great things and conversant about great concerns,
requires abundant scope and room and cannot spread and grow under
confinement and in circumstances straitened, narrow, and sordid.
Through the revenue alone the body politic can act in its true
genius and character, and, therefore, it will display just as much
of its collective virtue, and as much of that virtue which may
characterize those who move it and are, as it were, its life and
guiding principle, as it is possessed of a just revenue. For from
hence not only magnanimity, and liberality, and beneficence, and
fortitude, and providence, and the tutelary protection of all good
arts derive their food and the growth of their organs; but continence,
and self-denial, and labor, and vigilance, and frugality, and whatever
else there is in which the mind shows itself above the appetite, are
nowhere more in their proper element than in the provision and
distribution of the public wealth. It is, therefore, not without
reason that the science of speculative and practical finance, which
must take to its aid so many auxiliary branches of knowledge, stands
high in the estimation not only of the ordinary sort but of the wisest
and best men; and as this science has grown with the progress of its
object, the prosperity and improvement of nations has generally
increased with the increase of their revenues; and they will both
continue to grow and flourish as long as the balance between what is
left to strengthen the efforts of individuals and what is collected
for the common efforts of the state bear to each other a due
reciprocal proportion and are kept in a close correspondence and
communication. And perhaps it may be owing to the greatness of
revenues and to the urgency of state necessities that old abuses in
the constitution of finances are discovered and their true nature
and rational theory comes to be more perfectly understood: insomuch,
that a smaller revenue might have been more distressing in one
period than a far greater is found to be in another, the proportionate
wealth even remaining the same. In this state of things, the French
Assembly found something in their revenues to preserve, to secure, and
wisely to administer, as well as to abrogate and alter. Though their
proud assumption might justify the severest tests, yet in trying their
abilities on their financial proceedings, I would only consider what
is the plain obvious duty of a common finance minister, and try them
upon that, and not upon models of ideal perfection.
    The objects of a financier are, then, to secure an ample
revenue, to impose it with judgment and equality, to employ it
economically, and when necessity obliges him to make use of credit, to
secure its foundations in that instance, and forever, by the clearness
and candor of his proceedings, the exactness of his calculations and
the solidity of his funds. On these heads we may take a short and
distinct view of the merits and abilities of those in the National
Assembly who have taken to themselves the management of this arduous
concern. Far from any increase of revenue in their hands, I find, by a
report of M. Vernier, from the committee of finances, of the second of
August last, that the amount of the national revenue, as compared with
its produce before the Revolution, was diminished by the sum of two
hundred millions, or eight millions sterling of the annual income,
    If this be the result of great ability, never surely was ability
displayed in a more distinguished manner or with so powerful an
effect. No common folly, no vulgar incapacity, no ordinary official
negligence, even no official crime, no corruption, no peculation,
hardly any direct hostility which we have seen in the modern world
could in so short a time have made so complete an overthrow of the
finances and, with them, of the strength of a great kingdom.- Cedo qui
    The sophisters and declaimers, as soon as the Assembly met,
began with decrying the ancient constitution of the revenue in many of
its most essential branches, such as the public monopoly of salt. They
charged it, as truly as unwisely, with being ill-contrived,
oppressive, and partial. This representation they were not satisfied
to make use of in speeches preliminary to some plan of reform; they
declared it in a solemn resolution or public sentence, as it were
judicially passed upon it; and this they dispersed throughout the
nation. At the time they passed the decree, with the same gravity they
ordered the same absurd, oppressive, and partial tax to be paid
until they could find a revenue to replace it. The consequence was
inevitable. The provinces which had been always exempted from this
salt monopoly, some of whom were charged with other contributions,
perhaps equivalent, were totally disinclined to bear any part of the
burden which by an equal distribution was to redeem the others. As
to the Assembly, occupied as it was with the declaration and violation
of the rights of men, and with their arrangements for general
confusion, it had neither leisure nor capacity to contrive, nor
authority to enforce, any plan of any kind relative to the replacing
the tax or equalizing it, or compensating the provinces, or for
conducting their minds to any scheme of accommodation with other
    The people of the salt provinces, impatient under taxes, damned by
the authority which had directed their payment, very soon found
their patience exhausted. They thought themselves as skillful in
demolishing as the Assembly could be. They relieved themselves by
throwing off the whole burden. Animated by this example, each
district, or part of a district, judging of its own grievance by its
own feeling, and of its remedy by its own opinion, did as it pleased
    We are next to see how they have conducted themselves in
contriving equal impositions, proportioned to the means of the
citizens, and the least likely to lean heavy on the active capital
employed in the generation of that private wealth from whence the
public fortune must be derived. By suffering the several districts,
and several of the individuals in each district, to judge of what part
of the old revenue they might withhold, instead of better principles
of equality, a new inequality was introduced of the most oppressive
kind. Payments were regulated by dispositions. The parts of the
kingdom which were the most submissive, the most orderly, or the
most affectionate to the commonwealth bore the whole burden of the
state. Nothing turns out to be so oppressive and unjust as a feeble
government. To fill up all the deficiencies in the old impositions and
the new deficiencies of every kind which were to be expected- what
remained to a state without authority? The National Assembly called
for a voluntary benevolence: for a fourth part of the income of all
the citizens, to be estimated on the honor of those who were to pay.
They obtained something more than could be rationally calculated,
but what was far indeed from answerable to their real necessities, and
much less to their fond expectations. Rational people could have hoped
for little from this their tax in the disguise of a benevolence- a tax
weak, ineffective, and unequal; a tax by which luxury, avarice, and
selfishness were screened, and the load thrown upon productive
capital, upon integrity, generosity, and public spirit; a tax of
regulation upon virtue. At length the mask is thrown off, and they are
now trying means (with little success) of exacting their benevolence
    This benevolence, the rickety offspring of weakness, was to be
supported by another resource, the twin brother of the same prolific
imbecility. The patriotic donations were to make good the failure of
the patriotic contribution. John Doe was to become security for
Richard Roe. By this scheme they took things of much price from the
giver, comparatively of small value to the receiver; they ruined
several trades; they pillaged the crown of its ornaments, the churches
of their plate, and the people of their personal decorations. The
invention of these juvenile pretenders to liberty was in reality
nothing more than a servile imitation of one of the poorest
resources of doting despotism. They took an old, huge, full-bottomed
periwig out of the wardrobe of the antiquated frippery of Louis the
Fourteenth to cover the premature baldness of the National Assembly.
They produced this old-fashioned formal folly, though it had been so
abundantly exposed in the Memoirs of the Duke de St. Simon, if to
reasonable men it had wanted any arguments to display its mischief and
insufficiency. A device of the same kind was tried, in my memory, by
Louis the Fifteenth, but it answered at no time. However, the
necessities of ruinous wars were some excuse for desperate projects.
The deliberations of calamity are rarely wise. But here was a season
for disposition and providence. It was in a time of profound peace,
then enjoyed for five years, and promising a much longer
continuance, that they had recourse to this desperate trifling. They
were sure to lose more reputation by sporting, in their serious
situation, with these toys and playthings of finance, which have
filled half their journals, than could possibly be compensated by
the poor temporary supply which they afforded. It seemed as if those
who adopted such projects were wholly ignorant of their
circumstances or wholly unequal to their necessities. Whatever
virtue may be in these devices, it is obvious that neither the
patriotic gifts, nor the patriotic contribution, can ever be
resorted to again. The resources of public folly are soon exhausted.
The whole, indeed, of their scheme of revenue is to make, by any
artifice, an appearance of a full reservoir for the hour, whilst at
the same time they cut off the springs and living fountains of
perennial supply. The account not long since furnished by M. Necker
was meant, without question, to be favorable. He gives a flattering
view of the means of getting through the year, but he expresses, as it
is natural he should, some apprehension for that which was to succeed.
On this last prognostic, instead of entering into the grounds of
this apprehension in order, by a proper foresight, to prevent the
prognosticated evil, M. Necker receives a sort of friendly reprimand
    As to their other schemes of taxation, it is impossible to say
anything of them with certainty, because they have not yet had their
operation; but nobody is so sanguine as to imagine they will fill up
any perceptible part of the wide gaping breach which their
incapacity had made in their revenues. At present the state of their
treasury sinks every day more and more in cash, and swells more and
more in fictitious representation. When so little within or without is
now found but paper, the representative not of opulence but of want,
the creature not of credit but of power, they imagine that our
flourishing state in England is owing to that bank-paper, and not
the bank-paper to the flourishing condition of our commerce, to the
solidity of our credit, and to the total exclusion of all idea of
power from any part of the transaction. They forget that, in
England, not one shilling of paper money of any description is
received but of choice; that the whole has had its origin in cash
actually deposited; and that it is convertible at pleasure, in an
instant and without the smallest loss, into cash again. Our paper is
of value in commerce, because in law it is of none. It is powerful
on 'Change, because in Westminster Hall it is impotent. In payment
of a debt of twenty shillings, a creditor may refuse all the paper
of the Bank of England. Nor is there amongst us a single public
security, of any quality or nature whatsoever, that is enforced by
authority. In fact, it might be easily shown that our paper wealth,
instead of lessening the real coin, has a tendency to increase it;
instead of being a substitute for money, it only facilitates its
entry, its exit, and its circulation; that it is the symbol of
prosperity, and not the badge of distress. Never was a scarcity of
cash and an exuberance of paper a subject of complaint in this nation.
    Well! but a lessening of prodigal expenses, and the economy
which has been introduced by the virtuous and sapient Assembly, make
amends for the losses sustained in the receipt of revenue. In this
at least they have fulfilled the duty of a financier. Have those who
say so looked at the expenses of the National Assembly itself, of
the municipalities, of the city of Paris, of the increased pay of
the two armies, of the new police, of the new judicatures? Have they
even carefully compared the present pension list with the former?
These politicians have been cruel, not economical. Comparing the
expense of the former prodigal government and its relation to the then
revenues with the expenses of this new system as opposed to the
state of its new treasury, I believe the present will be found
    * The reader will observe that I have but lightly touched (my plan
demanded nothing more) on the condition of the French finances, as
connected with the demands upon them. If I had intended to do
otherwise, the materials in my hands for such a task are not
altogether perfect. On this subject I refer the reader to M. de
Calonne's work; and the tremendous display that he has made of the
havoc and devastation in the public estate, and in all the affairs
of France, caused by the presumptuous good intentions of ignorance and
incapacity. Such effects those causes will always produce. Looking
over that account with a pretty strict eye, and, with perhaps too much
rigor, deducting everything which may be placed to the account of a
financier out of place, who might be supposed by his enemies
desirous of making the most of his cause, I believe it will be found
that a more salutary lesson of caution against the daring spirit of
innovators than what has been supplied at the expense of France
    It remains only to consider the proofs of financial ability
furnished by the present French managers when they are to raise
supplies on credit. Here I am a little at a stand, for credit,
properly speaking, they have none. The credit of the ancient
government was not indeed the best, but they could always, on some
terms, command money, not only at home, but from most of the countries
of Europe where a surplus capital was accumulated; and the credit of
that government was improving daily. The establishment of a system
of liberty would of course be supposed to give it new strength; and so
it would actually have done if a system of liberty had been
established. What offers has their government of pretended liberty had
from Holland, from Hamburg, from Switzerland, from Genoa, from England
for a dealing in their paper? Why should these nations of commerce and
economy enter into any pecuniary dealings with a people who attempt to
reverse the very nature of things, amongst whom they see the debtor
prescribing at the point of the bayonet the medium of his solvency
to the creditor, discharging one of his engagements with another,
turning his very penury into his resource and paying his interest with
    Their fanatical confidence in the omnipotence of church plunder
has induced these philosophers to overlook all care of the public
estate, just as the dream of the philosopher's stone induces dupes,
under the more plausible delusion of the hermetic art, to neglect
all rational means of improving their fortunes. With these philosophic
financiers, this universal medicine made of church mummy is to cure
all the evils of the state. These gentlemen perhaps do not believe a
great deal in the miracles of piety, but it cannot be questioned
that they have an undoubting faith in the prodigies of sacrilege. Is
there a debt which presses them?- Issue assignats. Are compensations
to be made or a maintenance decreed to those whom they have robbed
of their freehold in their office, or expelled from their profession?-
Assignats. Is a fleet to be fitted out?- Assignats. If sixteen
millions sterling of these assignats, forced on the people, leave
the wants of the state as urgent as ever- issue, says one, thirty
millions sterling of assignats- says another, issue fourscore millions
more of assignats. The only difference among their financial
factions is on the greater or the lesser quantity of assignats to be
imposed on the public sufferance. They are all professors of
assignats. Even those whose natural good sense and knowledge of
commerce, not obliterated by philosophy, furnish decisive arguments
against this delusion conclude their arguments by proposing the
emission of assignats. I suppose they must talk of assignats, as no
other language would be understood. All experience of their
inefficiency does not in the least discourage them. Are the old
assignats depreciated at market?- What is the remedy? Issue new
assignats.- Mais si maladia, opiniatria, non vult se garire, quid illi
facere? assignare- postea assignare; ensuita assignare. The word is
a trifle altered. The Latin of your present doctors may be better than
that of your old comedy; their wisdom and the variety of their
resources are the same. They have not more notes in their song than
the cuckoo, though, far from the softness of that harbinger of
summer and plenty, their voice is as harsh and as ominous as that of
    Who but the most desperate adventurers in philosophy and finance
could at all have thought of destroying the settled revenue of the
state, the sole security for the public credit, in the hope of
rebuilding it with the materials of confiscated property? If, however,
an excessive zeal for the state should have led a pious and
venerable prelate (by anticipation a father of the church*) to pillage
his own order and, for the good of the church and people, to take upon
himself the place of grand financier of confiscation and
comptroller-general of sacrilege, he and his coadjutors were in my
opinion bound to show by their subsequent conduct that they knew
something of the office they assumed. When they had resolved to
appropriate to the Fisc a certain portion of the landed property of
their conquered country, it was their business to render their bank
a real fund of credit, as far as such a bank was capable of becoming
    To establish a current circulating credit upon any Land-bank,
under any circumstances whatsoever, has hitherto proved difficult at
the very least. The attempt has commonly ended in bankruptcy. But when
the Assembly were led, through a contempt of moral, to a defiance of
economical principles, it might at least have been expected that
nothing would be omitted on their part to lessen this difficulty, to
prevent any aggravation of this bankruptcy. It might be expected
that to render your land-bank tolerable, every means would be
adopted that could display openness and candor in the statement of the
security- everything which could aid the recovery of the demand. To
take things in their most favorable point of view, your condition
was that of a man of a large landed estate which he wished to
dispose of for the discharge of a debt and the supply of certain
services. Not being able instantly to sell, you wished to mortgage.
What would a man of fair intentions and a commonly clear understanding
do in such circumstances? Ought he not first to ascertain the gross
value of the estate, the charges of its management and disposition,
the encumbrances perpetual and temporary of all kinds that affect
it, then, striking a net surplus, to calculate the just value of the
security? When that surplus (the only security to the creditor) had
been clearly ascertained and properly vested in the hands of trustees,
then he would indicate the parcels to be sold, and the time and
conditions of sale; after this, he would admit the public creditor, if
he chose it, to subscribe his stock into this new fund, or he might
receive proposals for an assignat from those who would advance money
    This would be to proceed like men of business, methodically and
rationally, and on the only principles of public and private credit
that have an existence. The dealer would then know exactly what he
purchased; and the only doubt which could hang upon his mind would
be the dread of the resumption of the spoil, which one day might be
made (perhaps with an addition of punishment) from the sacrilegious
gripe of those execrable wretches who could become purchasers at the
    AN open and exact statement of the clear value of the property and
of the time, the circumstances, and the place of sale were all
necessary to efface as much as possible the stigma that has hitherto
been branded on every kind of land-bank. It became necessary on
another principle, that is, on account of a pledge of faith previously
given on that subject, that their future fidelity in a slippery
concern might be established by their adherence to their first
engagement. When they had finally determined on a state resource
from church booty, they came, on the 14th of April, 1790, to a
solemn resolution on the subject, and pledged themselves to their
country, "that in the statement of the public charges for each year,
there should be brought to account a sum sufficient for defraying
the expenses of the R. C. A. religion, the support of the ministers at
the altars, the relief of the poor, the pensions to the ecclesiastics,
secular as well as regular, of the one and of the other sex, in
order that the estates and goods which are at the disposal of the
nation may be disengaged of all charges and employed by the
representatives, or the legislative body, to the great and most
pressing exigencies of the state." They further engaged, on the same
day, that the sum necessary for the year 1791 should be forthwith
    In this resolution they admit it their duty to show distinctly the
expense of the above objects which, by other resolutions, they had
before engaged should be first in the order of provision. They admit
that they ought to show the estate clear and disengaged of all
charges, and that they should show it immediately. Have they done this
immediately, or at any time? Have they ever furnished a rent-roll of
the immovable estates, or given in an inventory of the movable effects
which they confiscate to their assignats? In what manner they can
fulfill their engagements of holding out to public service "an
estate disengaged of all charges" without authenticating the value
of the estate or the quantum of the charges, I leave it to their
English admirers to explain. Instantly upon this assurance, and
previously to any one step toward making it good, they issue, on the
credit of so handsome a declaration, sixteen millions sterling of
their paper. This was manly. Who, after this masterly stroke, can
doubt of their abilities in finance? But then, before any other
emission of these financial indulgences, they took care at least to
make good their original promise!- If such estimate either of the
value of the estate or the amount of the encumbrances has been made,
    At length they have spoken out, and they have made a full
discovery of their abominable fraud in holding out the church lands as
a security for any debts, or any service whatsoever. They rob only
to enable them to cheat, but in a very short time they defeat the ends
both of the robbery and the fraud by making out accounts for other
purposes which blow up their whole apparatus of force and of
deception. I am obliged to M. de Calonne for his reference to the
document which proves this extraordinary fact; it had by some means
escaped me. Indeed it was not necessary to make out my assertion as to
the breach of faith on the declaration of the 14th of April, 1790.
By a report of their committee it now appears that the charge of
keeping up the reduced ecclesiastical establishments and other
expenses attendant on religion, and maintaining the religious of
both sexes, retained or pensioned, and the other concomitant
expenses of the same nature which they have brought upon themselves by
this convulsion in property, exceeds the income of the estates
acquired by it in the enormous sum of two millions sterling
annually, besides a debt of seven millions and upwards. These are
the calculating powers of imposture! This is the finance of
philosophy! This is the result of all the delusions held out to engage
a miserable people in rebellion, murder, and sacrilege, and to make
them prompt and zealous instruments in the ruin of their country!
Never did a state, in any case, enrich itself by the confiscations
of the citizens. This new experiment has succeeded like all the
rest. Every honest mind, every true lover of liberty and humanity,
must rejoice to find that injustice is not always good policy, nor
rapine the high road to riches. I subjoin with pleasure, in a note,
the able and spirited observations of M. de Calonne on this subject.*
    * "Ce n'est point a l'assemblee entiere que je m'adresse ici; je
ne parle qu'a ceux qui l'egarent, en lui cachant sous des gazes
seduisantes le but ou ils l'entrainent. C'est a eux que je dis:
votre objet, vous n'en disconviendrez pas, c'est d'oter tout espoir au
clerge, & de consommer sa ruine; c'est-la, en ne vous soupconnant
d'aucune combinaison de cupidite, d'aucun regard sur le jeu des effets
publics, c'est-la ce qu'on doit croire que vous avez en vue dans la
terrible operation que vous proposez; c'est ce qui doit en etre le
fruit. Mais le peuple que vous y interessez, quel avantage peut-il y
trouver? En vous servant sans cesse de lui, que faites vous pour
lui? Rien, absolument rien; &, au contraire, vous faites ce qui ne
conduit qu'a l'accabler de nouvelles charges. Vous avez rejete, a
son prejudice, une offre de 400 millions, dont l'acceptation pouvoit
devenir un moyen de soulagement en sa faveur; & a cette ressource,
aussi profitable que legitime, vous avez substitue une injustice
ruineuse, qui, de votre propre aveu, charge le tresor public, & par
consequent le peuple, d'un surcroit de depense annuelle de 50 millions
    "Malheureux peuple, voila ce que vous vaut en dernier resultat
l'expropriation de l'Eglise, & la durete des decrets taxateurs du
traitement des ministres d'une religion bienfaisante; & deformais
ils seront a votre charge: leurs charites soulageoient les pauvres;
& vous allez etre imposes pour subvenir a leur entretien!"- De
l'Etat de la France, p. 81. See also p. 92, and the following pages.
    In order to persuade the world of the bottomless resource of
ecclesiastical confiscation, the Assembly have proceeded to other
confiscations of estates in offices, which could not be done with
any common color without being compensated out of this grand
confiscation of landed property. They have thrown upon this fund,
which was to show a surplus disengaged of all charges, a new charge-
namely, the compensation to the whole body of the disbanded
judicature, and of all suppressed offices and estates, a charge
which I cannot ascertain, but which unquestionably amounts to many
French millions. Another of the new charges is an annuity of four
hundred and eighty thousand pounds sterling, to be paid (if they
choose to keep faith) by daily payments, for the interest of the first
assignats. Have they even given themselves the trouble to state fairly
the expense of the management of the church lands in the hands of
the municipalities to whose care, skill, and diligence, and that of
their legion of unknown underagents, they have chosen to commit the
charge of the forfeited estates, the consequence of which had been
    But it is unnecessary to dwell on these obvious heads of
encumbrance. Have they made out any clear state of the grand
encumbrance of all, I mean the whole of the general and municipal
establishments of all sorts, and compared it with the regular income
by revenue? Every deficiency in these becomes a charge on the
confiscated estate before the creditor can plant his cabbages on an
acre of church property. There is no other prop than this confiscation
to keep the whole state from tumbling to the ground. In this situation
they have purposely covered all that they ought industriously to
have cleared with a thick fog, and then, blindfold themselves, like
bulls that shut their eyes when they push, they drive, by the point of
the bayonets, their slaves, blindfolded indeed no worse than their
lords, to take their fictions for currencies and to swallow down paper
pills by thirty-four millions sterling at a dose. Then they proudly
lay in their claim to a future credit, on failure of all their past
engagements, and at a time when (if in such a matter anything can be
clear) it is clear that the surplus estates will never answer even the
first of their mortgages, I mean that of the four hundred millions (or
sixteen millions sterling) of assignats. In all this procedure I can
discern neither the solid sense of plain dealing nor the subtle
dexterity of ingenious fraud. The objections within the Assembly to
pulling up the floodgates for this inundation of fraud are unanswered,
but they are thoroughly refuted by a hundred thousand financiers in
the street. These are the numbers by which the metaphysic
arithmeticians compute. These are the grand calculations on which a
philosophical public credit is founded in France. They cannot raise
supplies, but they can raise mobs. Let them rejoice in the applauses
of the club at Dundee for their wisdom and patriotism in having thus
applied the plunder of the citizens to the service of the state. I
hear of no address upon this subject from the directors of the Bank of
England, though their approbation would be of a little more weight
in the scale of credit than that of the club at Dundee. But, to do
justice to the club, I believe the gentlemen who compose it to be
wiser than they appear; that they will be less liberal of their
money than of their addresses; and that they would not give a dog's
ear of their most rumpled and ragged Scotch paper for twenty of your
    Early in this year the Assembly issued paper to the amount of
sixteen millions sterling; what must have been the state into which
the Assembly has brought your affairs, that the relief afforded by
so vast a supply has been hardly perceptible? This paper also felt
an almost immediate depreciation of five per cent, which in a little
time came to about seven. The effect of these assignats on the receipt
of the revenue is remarkable. M. Necker found that the collectors of
the revenue who received in coin paid the treasury in assignats. The
collectors made seven per cent by thus receiving in money and
accounting in depreciated paper. It was not very difficult to
foresee that this must be inevitable. It was, however, not the less
embarrassing. M. Necker was obliged (I believe, for a considerable
part, in the market of London) to buy gold and silver for the mint,
which amounted to about twelve thousand pounds above the value of
the commodity gained. That minister was of opinion that, whatever
their secret nutritive virtue might be, the state could not live
upon assignats alone, that some real silver was necessary,
particularly for the satisfaction of those who, having iron in their
hands, were not likely to distinguish themselves for patience when
they should perceive that, whilst an increase of pay was held out to
them in real money, it was again to be fraudulently drawn back by
depreciated paper. The minister, in this very natural distress,
applied to the Assembly that they should order the collectors to pay
in specie what in specie they had received. It could not escape him
that if the treasury paid three per cent for the use of a currency
which should be returned seven per cent worse than the minister issued
it, such a dealing could not very greatly tend to enrich the public.
The Assembly took no notice of this recommendation. They were in
this dilemma: if they continued to receive the assignats, cash must
become an alien to their treasury; if the treasury should refuse those
paper amulets or should discountenance them in any degree, they must
destroy the credit of their sole resource. They seem then to have made
their option, and to have given some sort of credit to their paper
by taking it themselves; at the same time in their speeches they
made a sort of swaggering declaration, something, I rather think,
above legislative competence; that is, that there is no difference
in value between metallic money and their assignats. This was a
good, stout, proof article of faith, pronounced under an anathema by
the venerable fathers of this philosophic synod. Credat who will-
    A noble indignation rises in the minds of your popular leaders
on hearing the magic lantern in their show of finance compared to
the fraudulent exhibitions of Mr. Law. They cannot bear to hear the
sands of his Mississippi compared with the rock of the church on which
they build their system. Pray let them suppress this glorious spirit
until they show to the world what piece of solid ground there is for
their assignats which they have not preoccupied by other charges. They
do injustice to that great mother fraud to compare it with their
degenerate imitation. It is not true that Law built solely on a
speculation concerning the Mississippi. He added the East India trade;
he added the African trade; he added the farms of all the farmed
revenue of France. All these together unquestionably could not support
the structure which the public enthusiasm, not he, chose to build upon
these bases. But these were, however, in comparison generous
delusions. They supposed, and they aimed at, an increase of the
commerce of France. They opened to it the whole range of the two
hemispheres. They did not think of feeding France from its own
substance. A grand imagination found in this night of commerce
something to captivate. It was wherewithal to dazzle the eye of an
eagle. It was not made to entice the smell of a mole nuzzling and
burying himself in his mother earth, as yours is. Men were not then
quite shrunk from their natural dimensions by a degrading and sordid
philosophy, and fitted for low and vulgar deceptions. Above all,
remember that in imposing on the imagination the then managers of
the system made a compliment to the freedom of men. In their fraud
there was no mixture of force. This was reserved to our time, to
quench the little glimmerings of reason which might break in upon
    On recollection, I have said nothing of a scheme of finance
which may be urged in favor of the abilities of these gentlemen, and
which has been introduced with great pomp, though not yet finally
adopted, in the National Assembly. It comes with something solid in
aid of the credit of the paper circulation; and much has been said
of its utility and its elegance. I mean the project for coining into
money the bells of the suppressed churches. This is their alchemy.
There are some follies which baffle argument, which go beyond
ridicule, and which excite no feeling in us but disgust; and therefore
    It is as little worth remarking any further upon all their drawing
and re-drawing on their circulation for putting off the evil day, on
the play between the treasury and the Caisse d'Escompte, and on all
these old, exploded contrivances of mercantile fraud now exalted
into policy of state. The revenue will not be trifled with. The
prattling about the rights of men will not be accepted in payment
for a biscuit or a pound of gunpowder. Here then the metaphysicians
descend from their airy speculations and faithfully follow examples.
What examples? The examples of bankrupts. But defeated, baffled,
disgraced, when their breath, their strength, their inventions,
their fancies desert them, their confidence still maintains its
ground. In the manifest failure of their abilities, they take credit
for their benevolence. When the revenue disappears in their hands,
they have the presumption, in some of their late proceedings, to value
themselves on the relief given to the people. They did not relieve the
people. If they entertained such intentions, why did they order the
obnoxious taxes to be paid? The people relieved themselves in spite of
    But waiving all discussion on the parties who may claim the
merit of this fallacious relief, has there been, in effect, any relief
to the people in any form? Mr. Bailly, one of the grand agents of
paper circulation, lets you into the nature of this relief. His speech
to the National Assembly contained a high and labored panegyric on the
inhabitants of Paris for the constancy and unbroken resolution with
which they have borne their distress and misery. A fine picture of
public felicity! What great courage and unconquerable firmness of mind
to endure benefits and sustain redress! One would think from the
speech of this learned lord mayor that the Parisians, for this
twelvemonth past, had been suffering the straits of some dreadful
blockade, that Henry the Fourth had been stopping up the avenues to
their supply, and Sully thundering with his ordnance at the gates of
Paris, when in reality they are besieged by no other enemies than
their own madness and folly, their own credulity and perverseness. But
Mr. Bailly will sooner thaw the eternal ice of his Atlantic regions
than restore the central heat to Paris whilst it remains "smitten with
the cold, dry, petrific mace" of a false and unfeeling philosophy.
Some time after this speech, that is, on the thirteenth of last
August, the same magistrate, giving an account of his government at
the bar of the same Assembly, expresses himself as follows:
      In the month of July, 1789, (the period of everlasting
  commemoration) the finances of the city of Paris were yet in good
  order; the expenditure was counterbalanced by the receipt; and she
  had at that time a million (forty thousand pounds sterling) in bank.
  The expenses which she has been constrained to incur, subsequent to
  the Revolution, amount to 2,500,000 livres. From these expenses, and
  the great falling off in the product of the free gifts, not only a
  momentary, but a total, want of money has taken place.
This is the Paris upon whose nourishment, in the course of the last
year, such immense sums, drawn from the vitals of all France, have
been expended. As long as Paris stands in the place of ancient Rome,
so long she will be maintained by the subject provinces. It is an evil
inevitably attendant on the dominion of sovereign democratic
republics. As it happened in Rome, it may survive that republican
domination which gave rise to it. In that case despotism itself must
submit to the vices of popularity. Rome, under her emperors, united
the evils of both systems; and this unnatural combination was one
    To tell the people that they are relieved by the dilapidation of
their public estate is a cruel and insolent imposition. Statesmen,
before they valued themselves on the relief given to the people by the
destruction of their revenue, ought first to have carefully attended
to the solution of this problem- whether it be more advantageous to
the people to pay considerably and to gain in proportion, or to gain
little or nothing and to be disburdened of all contribution? My mind
is made up to decide in favor of the first proposition. Experience
is with me, and, I believe, the best opinions also. To keep a
balance between the power of acquisition on the part of the subject
and the demands he is to answer on the part of the state is the
fundamental part of the skill of a true politician. The means of
acquisition are prior in time and in arrangement. Good order is the
foundation of all good things. To be enabled to acquire, the people,
without being servile, must be tractable and obedient. The
magistrate must have his reverence, the laws their authority. The body
of the people must not find the principles of natural subordination by
art rooted out of their minds. They must respect that property of
which they cannot partake. They must labor to obtain what by labor can
be obtained; and when they find, as they commonly do, the success
disproportioned to the endeavour, they must be taught their
consolation in the final proportions of eternal justice. Of this
consolation, whoever deprives them deadens their industry and
strikes at the root of all acquisition as of all conservation. He that
does this is the cruel oppressor, the merciless enemy of the poor
and wretched, at the same time that by his wicked speculations he
exposes the fruits of successful industry and the accumulations of
fortune to the plunder of the negligent, the disappointed, and the
  Too many of the financiers by profession are apt to see nothing in
revenue but banks, and circulations, and annuities on lives, and
tontines, and perpetual rents, and all the small wares of the shop. In
a settled order of the state, these things are not to be slighted, nor
is the skill in them to be held of trivial estimation. They are
good, but then only good when they assume the effects of that
settled order and are built upon it. But when men think that these
beggarly contrivances may supply a resource for the evils which result
from breaking up the foundations of public order, and from causing
or suffering the principles of property to be subverted, they will, in
the ruin of their country, leave a melancholy and lasting monument
of the effect of preposterous politics and presumptuous,
    The effects of the incapacity shown by the popular leaders in
all the great members of the commonwealth are to be covered with the
"all-atoning name" of liberty. In some people I see great liberty
indeed; in many, if not in the most, an oppressive, degrading
servitude. But what is liberty without wisdom and without virtue? It
is the greatest of all possible evils; for it is folly, vice, and
madness, without tuition or restraint. Those who know what virtuous
liberty is cannot bear to see it disgraced by incapable heads on
account of their having high-sounding words in their mouths. Grand,
swelling sentiments of liberty I am sure I do not despise. They warm
the heart; they enlarge and liberalize our minds; they animate our
courage in a time of conflict. Old as I am, I read the fine raptures
of Lucan and Corneille with pleasure. Neither do I wholly condemn
the little arts and devices of popularity. They facilitate the
carrying of many points of moment; they keep the people together; they
refresh the mind in its exertions; and they diffuse occasional
gaiety over the severe brow of moral freedom. Every politician ought
to sacrifice to the graces, and to join compliance with reason. But in
such an undertaking as that in France, all these subsidiary sentiments
and artifices are of little avail. To make a government requires no
great prudence. Settle the seat of power, teach obedience, and the
work is done. To give freedom is still more easy. It is not
necessary to guide; it only requires to let go the rein. But to form a
free government, that is, to temper together these opposite elements
of liberty and restraint in one consistent work, requires much
thought, deep reflection, a sagacious, powerful, and combining mind.
This I do not find in those who take the lead in the National
Assembly. Perhaps they are not so miserably deficient as they
appear. I rather believe it. It would put them below the common
level of human understanding. But when the leaders choose to make
themselves bidders at an auction of popularity, their talents, in
the construction of the state, will be of no service. They will become
flatterers instead of legislators, the instruments, not the guides, of
the people. If any of them should happen to propose a scheme of
liberty, soberly limited and defined with proper qualifications, he
will be immediately outbid by his competitors who will produce
something more splendidly popular. Suspicions will be raised of his
fidelity to his cause. Moderation will be stigmatized as the virtue of
cowards, and compromise as the prudence of traitors, until, in hopes
of preserving the credit which may enable him to temper and
moderate, on some occasions, the popular leader is obliged to become
active in propagating doctrines and establishing powers that will
afterwards defeat any sober purpose at which he ultimately might
    But am I so unreasonable as to see nothing at all that deserves
commendation in the indefatigable labors of this Assembly? I do not
deny that, among an infinite number of acts of violence and folly,
some good may have been done. They who destroy everything certainly
will remove some grievance. They who make everything new have a chance
that they may establish something beneficial. To give them credit
for what they have done in virtue of the authority they have
usurped, or which can excuse them in the crimes by which that
authority has been acquired, it must appear that the same things could
not have been accomplished without producing such a revolution. Most
assuredly they might, because almost every one of the regulations made
by them which is not very equivocal was either in the cession of the
king, voluntarily made at the meeting of the states, or in the
concurrent instructions to the orders. Some usages have been abolished
on just grounds, but they were such that if they had stood as they
were to all eternity, they would little detract from the happiness and
prosperity of any state. The improvements of the National Assembly are
    Whatever they are, I wish my countrymen rather to recommend to our
neighbors the example of the British constitution than to take
models from them for the improvement of our own. In the former, they
have got an invaluable treasure. They are not, I think, without some
causes of apprehension and complaint, but these they do not owe to
their constitution but to their own conduct. I think our happy
situation owing to our constitution, but owing to the whole of it, and
not to any part singly, owing in a great measure to what we have
left standing in our several reviews and reformations as well as to
what we have altered or superadded. Our people will find employment
enough for a truly patriotic, free, and independent spirit in guarding
what they possess from violation. I would not exclude alteration
neither, but even when I changed, it should be to preserve. I should
be led to my remedy by a great grievance. In what I did, I should
follow the example of our ancestors. I would make the reparation as
nearly as possible in the style of the building. A politic caution,
a guarded circumspection, a moral rather than a complexional
timidity were among the ruling principles of our forefathers in
their most decided conduct. Not being illuminated with the light of
which the gentlemen of France tell us they have got so abundant a
share, they acted under a strong impression of the ignorance and
fallibility of mankind. He that had made them thus fallible rewarded
them for having in their conduct attended to their nature. Let us
imitate their caution if we wish to deserve their fortune or to retain
their bequests. Let us add, if we please, but let us preserve what
they have left; and, standing on the firm ground of the British
constitution, let us be satisfied to admire rather than attempt to
follow in their desperate flights the aeronauts of France.
    I have told you candidly my sentiments. I think they are not
likely to alter yours. I do not know that they ought. You are young;
you cannot guide but must follow the fortune of your country. But
hereafter they may be of some use to you, in some future form which
your commonwealth may take. In the present it can hardly remain; but
before its final settlement it may be obliged to pass, as one of our
poets says, "through great varieties of untried being", and in all its
    I have little to recommend my opinions but long observation and
much impartiality. They come from one who has been no tool of power,
no flatterer of greatness; and who in his last acts does not wish to
belie the tenor of his life. They come from one almost the whole of
whose public exertion has been a struggle for the liberty of others;
from one in whose breast no anger, durable or vehement, has ever
been kindled but by what he considered as tyranny; and who snatches
from his share in the endeavors which are used by good men to
discredit opulent oppression the hours he has employed on your
affairs; and who in so doing persuades himself he has not departed
from his usual office; they come from one who desires honors,
distinctions, and emoluments but little, and who expects them not at
all; who has no contempt for fame, and no fear of obloquy; who shuns
contention, though he will hazard an opinion; from one who wishes to
preserve consistency, but who would preserve consistency by varying
his means to secure the unity of his end, and, when the equipoise of
the vessel in which he sails may be endangered by overloading it
upon one side, is desirous of carrying the small weight of his reasons
     I sit down to give you an undeniable proof of my con-
sidering your desires as indispensable orders.  Ungracious
then as the task may be, I shall recall to view those scan-
dalous stages of my life, out of which I emerg'd, at length,
to the enjoyment of every blessing in the power of love,
health, and fortune to bestow; whilst yet in the flower of
youth, and not too late to employ the leisure afforded me by
great ease and affluence, to cultivate an understanding,
naturally not a despicable one, and which had, even amidst
the whirl of loose pleasures I had been tost in, exerted 
more observation on the characters and manners of the world
than what is common to those of my unhappy profession, who
looking on all thought or reflection as their capital enemy,
keep it at as great a distance as they can, or destroy it
     Hating, as I mortally do, all long unnecessary preface,
I shall give you good quarter in this, and use no farther
apology, than to prepare you for seeing the loose part of my
     Truth! stark, naked truth, is the word; and I will not
so much as take the pains to bestow the strip of a gauze
wrapper on it, but paint situations such as they actually
rose to me in nature, careless of violating those laws of
decency that were never made for such unreserved intimacies
as ours; and you have too much sense, too much knowledge of
the ORIGINALS themselves, to sniff prudishly and out of
character at the PICTURES of them.  The greatest men, those
of the first and most leading taste, will not scruple adorning
their private closets with nudities, though, in compliance
with vulgar prejudices, they may not think them decent deco-
     This, and enough, premised, I go souse into my personal
history.  My maiden name was Frances Hill.  I was born at a
small village near Liverpool, in Lancashire, of parents ex-
tremely poor, and, I piously believe, extremely honest.
     My father, who had received a maim on his limbs that
disabled him from following the more laborious branches of
country-drudgery, got, by making of nets, a scanty subsis-
tence, which was not much enlarg'd by my mother's keeping
a little day-school for the girls in her neighbourhood.
They had had several children; but none lived to any age
except myself, who had received from nature a constitution
     My education, till past fourteen, was no better than
very vulgar; reading, or rather spelling, an illegible
scrawl, and a little ordinary plain work composed the whole
system of it; and then all my foundation in virtue was no
other than a total ignorance of vice, and the shy timidity
general to our sex, in the tender stage of life when objects
alarm or frighten more by their novelty than anything else.
But then, this is a fear too often cured at the expence of
innocence, when Miss, by degrees, begins no longer to look
     My poor mother had divided her time so entirely be-
tween her scholars and her little domestic cares, that she
had spared very little of it to my instruction, having,
from her own innocence from all ill, no hint or thought of 
     I was now entering on my fifteenth year, when the 
worst of ills befell me in the loss of my tender fond par-
ents, who were both carried off by the small-pox, within a
few days of each other; my father dying first, and thereby
hastening the death of my mother; so that I was now left an
unhappy friendless orphan (for my father's coming to settle
there was accidental, he being originally a Kentishman).  
That cruel distemper which had proved so fatal to them, had
indeed seized me, but with such mild and favourable symptoms,
that I was presently out of danger, and, what I then did not
know the value of, was entirely unmark'd.  I skip over here
an account of the natural grief and affliction which I felt 
on this melancholy occasion.  A little time, and the giddi-
ness of that age dissipated, too soon, my reflections on
that irreparable loss; but nothing contributed more to recon-
cile me to it, than the notions that were immediately put
into my head, of going to London, and looking out for a 
service, in which I was promised all assistance and advice
from one Esther Davis, a young woman that had been down to
see her friends, and who, after the stay of a few days, was
     As I had now nobody left alive in the village who had
concern enough about what should become of me to start any
objections to this scheme, and the woman who took care of
me after my parents; death rather encouraged me to pursue
it, I soon came to a resolution of making this launch into
the wide world, by repairing to London, in order to SEEK 
MY FORTUNE, a phrase which, by the bye, has ruined more
adventurers of both sexes, from the country, than ever it
     Nor did Esther Davis a little comfort and inspirit me
to venture with her, by piquing my childish curiosity with
the fine sights that were to be seen in London: the Tombs,
the Lions, the King, the Royal Family, the fine Plays and
Operas, and, in short, all the diversions which fell within
her sphere of life to come at; the detail of all which per-
     Nor can I remember, without laughing, the innocent ad-
miration, not without a spice of envy, with which we poor
girls, whose church-going clothes did not rise above dowlass
shifts and stuff gowns, beheld Esther's scowered satin gowns, 
caps border'd with an inch of lace, taudry ribbons, and shoes
belaced with silver: all which we imagined grew in London,
and entered for a great deal into my determination of trying
     The idea however of having the company of a townswoman
with her, was the trivial, and all the motives that engaged 
Esther to take charge of me during my journey to town, where
she told me, after her manner and style, "as how several 
maids out of the country had made themselves and all their
kin for ever: that by preserving their VIRTUE, some had taken
so with their masters, that they had married them, and kept
them coaches, and lived vastly grand and happy; and some,
may-hap, came to be Duchesses; luck was all, and why not I,
as well as another?"; with other almanacs to this purpose,
which set me a tip-toe to begin this promising journey, and
to leave a place which, though my native one, contained no
relations that I had reason to regret, and was grown insup-
portable to me, from the change of the tenderest usage into
a cold air of charity, with which I was entertain'd even at
the only friend's house that I had the least expectation of
care and protection from.  She was, however, so just to me,
as to manage the turning into money of the little matters
that remained to me after the debts and burial charges were
accounted for, and, at my departure, put my whole fortune 
into my hands; which consisted of a very slender wardrobe,
pack'd up in a very portable box, and eight guineas, with
seventeen shillings in silver; stowed up in a spring-pouch,
which was a greater treasure than ever I had yet seen to-
gether, and which I could not conceive there was a possi-
bility of running out; and indeed, I was so entirely taken
up with the joy of seeing myself mistress of such an im-
mense sum, that I gave very little attention to a world of
     Places, then, being taken for Esther and me in the
London waggon, I pass over a very immaterial scene of 
leavetaking, at which I dropt a few tears betwixt grief and
joy; and, for the same reasons of insignificance, skip over
all that happened to me on the road, such as the waggoner's
looking liquorish on me, the schemes laid for me by some of
the passengers, which were defeated by the vigilance of my
guardian Esther; who, to do her justice, took a motherly 
care of me, at the same time that she taxed me for her pro-
tection by making me bear all travelling charges, which I
defrayed with the utmost cheerfulness, and thought myself
     She took indeed great care that we were not over-rated,
or imposed on, as well as of managing as frugally as possible;
     It was pretty late in a summer evening when we reached 
London-town, in our slow conveyance, though drawn by six at
length.  As we passed through the greatest streets that led
to our inn, the noise of the coaches, the hurry, the crowds
of foot passengers, in short, the new scenery of the shops 
     But guess at my mortification and surprize when we 
came to the inn, and our things were landed and deliver'd
to us, when my fellow traveller and protectress, Esther
Davis, who had used me with the utmost tenderness during
the journey, and prepared me by no preceding signs for the
stunning blow I was to receive, when I say, my only depend-
ence and friend, in this strange place, all of a sudden 
assumed a strange and cool air towards me, as if she dreaded
     Instead, then, of proffering me the continuance of her
assistance and good offices, which I relied upon, and never
more wanted, she thought herself, it seems, abundantly ac-
quitted of her engagements to me, by having brought me safe
to my journey's end; and seeing nothing in her procedure 
towards me but what was natural and in order, began to em-
brace me by way of taking leave, whilst I was so confounded,
so struck, that I had not spirit or sense enough so much as
to mention my hopes or expectations from her experience, and
     Whilst I stood thus stupid and mute, which she doubt-
less attributed to nothing more than a concern at parting,
this idea procured me perhaps a slight alleviation of it,
in the following harangue:  That now we were got safe to
London, and that she was obliged to go to her place, she
advised me by all means to get into one as soon as possible;
that I need not fear getting one; there were more places
than parish-churches; that she advised me to go to an
intelligence office; that if she heard of any thing stirring,
she would find me out and let me know; that in the meantime,
I should take a private lodging, and acquaint her where to
send to me; that she wish'd me good luck, and hoped I should
always have the grace to keep myself honest, and not bring a
disgrace on my parentage.  With this, she took her leave of
me, and left me, as it were, on my own hands, full as
     Left thus alone, absolutely destitute and friendless,
I began then to feel most bitterly the severity of this
separation, the scene of which had passed in a little room
in the inn; and no sooner was her back turned, but the af-
fliction I felt at my helpless strange circumstances burst
out into a flood of tears, which infinitely relieved the
oppression of my heart; though I still remained stupefied,
and most perfectly perplex'd how to dispose of myself.
     One of the waiters coming in, added yet more to my
uncertainty by asking me, in a short way, if I called for
anything? to which I replied innocently:  "No."  But I
wished him to tell me where I might get a lodging for that
night.  He said he would go and speak to his mistress, who
accordingly came, and told me drily, without entering in
the least into the distress she saw me in, that I might have
a bed for a shilling, and that, as she supposed I had some
friends in town (here I fetched a deep sigh in vain!) I
     'Tis incredible what trifling consolations the human
mind will seize in its greatest afflictions.  The assurance
of nothing more than a bed to lie on that night, calmed my
agonies; and being asham'd to acquaint the mistress of the
inn that I had no friends to apply to in town, I proposed
to myself to proceed, the very next morning, to an intelli-
gence office, to which I was furnish'd with written direc-
tions on the back of a ballad Esther had given me.  There I
counted on getting information of any place that such a
country girl as I might be fit for, and where I could get
into any sort of being, before my little stock should be
consumed; and as to a character, Esther had often repeated
to me that I might depend on her managing me one; nor, how-
ever affected I was at her leaving me thus, did I entirely
cease to rely on her, as I began to think, good-naturedly,
that her procedure was all in course, and that it was only 
my ignorance of life that had made me take it in the light
     Accordingly, the next morning I dress'd myself as clean
and as neat as my rustic wardrobe would permit me; and
having left my box, with special recommendation, with the
landlady, I ventured out by myself, and without any more
difficulty than can be supposed of a young country girl,
barely fifteen, and to whom every sign or shop was a gazing
trap, I got to the wish'd-for intelligence office.
     It was kept by an elderly woman, who sat at the
receipt of custom, with a book before her in great form and
order, and several scrolls, ready made out, of directions
     I made up then to this important personage, without
lifting up my eyes or observing any of the people round me,
who were attending there on the same errand as myself, and
dropping her curtsies nine-deep, just made a shift to
     Madam having heard me out, with all the gravity and
brow of a petty minister of State, and seeing at one glance
over my figure what I was, made me no answer, but to ask
me the preliminary shilling, on receipt of which she told
me places for women were exceedingly scarce, especially as
I seemed too slight built for hard work; but that she
would look over her book, and see what was to be done for
me, desiring me to stay a little till she had dispatched
     On this I drew back a little, most heartily mortified
at a declaration which carried with it a killing uncertainty
     Presently, assuming more courage, and seeking some di-
version from my uneasy thoughts, I ventured to lift up my
head a little, and sent my eyes on a course round the room,
wherein they met full tilt with those of a lady (for such
my extreme innocence pronounc'd her) sitting in a corner of
the room, dress'd in a velvet mantle (nota bene, in the 
midst of summer), with her bonnet off; squab-fat, red-faced,
     She look'd as if she would devour me with her eyes,
staring at me from head to foot, without the least regard
to the confusion and blushes her eyeing me so fixedly put
me to, and which were to her, no doubt, the strongest re-
commendation and marks of my being fit for her purpose.
After a little time, in which my air, person and whole
figure had undergone a strict examination, which I had, on
my part, tried to render favourable to me, by primming,
drawing up my neck, and setting my best looks, she advanced
     "Yes, and please you" (with a curtsy down to the 
     Upon this she acquainted me that she was actually 
come to the office herself to look out for a servant; that
she believed I might do, with a little of her instructions;
that she could take my very looks for a sufficient character;
that London was a very wicked, vile place; that she hoped I
would be tractable, and keep out of bad company; in short, 
she said all to me that an old experienced practitioner in
town could think of, and which was much more than was neces-
sary to take in an artless inexperienced country-maid, who
was even afraid of becoming a wanderer about the streets,
and therefore gladly jump'd at the first offer of a shelter,
especially from so grave and matron-like a lady, for such my
flattering fancy assured me this new mistress of mine was;
I being actually hired under the nose of the good woman that
kept the office, whose shrewd smiles and shrugs I could not 
help observing, and innocently interpreted them as marks of
her being pleased at my getting into place so soon; but, as
I afterwards came to know, these BELDAMS understood one an-
other very well, and this was a market where Mrs. Brown, my
mistress, frequently attended, on the watch for any fresh
goods that might offer there, for the use of her customers,
     Madam was, however, so well pleased with her bargain, 
that fearing, I presume, lest better advice or some accident
might occasion my slipping through her fingers, she would
officiously take me in a coach to my inn, where, calling 
herself for my box, it was, I being present, delivered with-
out the least scruple or explanation as to where I was going.
     This being over, she bid the coachman drive to a shop
in St. Paul's Churchyard, where she bought a pair of gloves,
which she gave me, and thence renewed her directions to the
coachman to drive to her house in *** street, who accord-
ingly landed us at her door, after I had been cheer'd up and
entertain'd by the way with the most plausible flams, without
one syllable from which I could conclude anything but that I
was, by the greatest good luck, fallen into the hands of the
kindest mistress, not to say friend, that the varsal world
could afford; and accordingly I enter'd her doors with most
compleat confidence and exultation, promising myself that,
as soon as I should be a little settled, I would acquaint
     You may be sure the good opinion of my place was not
lessen'd by the appearance of a very handsome back parlour,
into which I was led and which seemed to me magnificently
furnished, who had never seen better rooms than the ordi-
nary ones in inns upon the road.  There were two gilt pier-
glasses, and a buffet, on which a few pieces of plates, set
out to the most shew, dazzled, and altogether persuaded me
     Here my mistress first began her part, with telling me
that I must have good spirits, and learn to be free with
her; that she had not taken me to be a common servant, to
do domestic drudgery, but to be a kind of companion to her;
and that if I would be a good girl, she would do more than
twenty mothers for me; to all which I answered only by the
profoundest and the awkwardest curtsies, and a few mono-
     Presently my mistress touch'd the bell, and in came a
strapping maid-servant, who had let us in.  "Here, Martha,"
said Mrs. Brown--"I have just hir'd this young woman to
look after my linen; so step up and shew her her chamber;
and I charge you to use her with as much respect as you 
would myself, for I have taken a prodigious liking to her,
     Martha, who was an arch-jade, and, being used to this
decoy, had her cue perfect, made me a kind of half curtsy,
and asked me to walk up with her; and accordingly shew'd 
me a neat room, two pair of stairs backwards, in which 
there was a handsome bed, where Martha told me I was to 
lie with a young gentlewoman, a cousin of my mistress's,
who she was sure would be vastly good to me.  Then she ran
out into such affected encomiums on her good mistress! her
sweet mistress! and how happy I was to light upon her!
that I could not have bespoke a better; with other the
like gross stuff, such as would itself have started sus-
picions in any but such an unpractised simpleton, who was
perfectly new to life, and who took every word she said in
the very sense she laid out for me to take it; but she
readily saw what a penetration she had to deal with, and
measured me very rightly in her manner of whistling to me,
so as to make me pleased with my cage, and blind to the 
     In the midst of these false explanations of the nature
of my future service, we were rung for down again, and I was
reintroduced into the same parlour, where there was a table
laid with three covers; and my mistress had now got with her
one of her favourite girls, a notable manager of her house,
and whose business it was to prepare and break such young
fillies as I was to the mounting-block; and she was accord-
ingly, in that view, allotted me for a bed-fellow; and, to
give her the more authority, she had the title of cousin con-
ferr'd on her by the venerable president of this college.
     Here I underwent a second survey, which ended in the full
approbation of Mrs. Phoebe Ayres, the name of my tutoress
elect, to whose care and instructions I was affectionately 
     Dinner was now set on table, and in pursuance of treating
me as a companion, Mrs. Brown, with a tone to cut off all 
dispute, soon over-rul'd my most humble and most confused
protestations against sitting down with her LADYSHIP, which
my very short breeding just suggested to me could not be
     At table, the conversation was chiefly kept up by the
two madams, and carried on in double-meaning expressions,
interrupted every now and then by kind assurance to me, all
tending to confirm and fix my satisfaction with my present 
condition: augment it they could not, so very a novice was
     It was here agreed that I should keep myself up and
out of sight for a few days, till such cloaths could be 
procured for me as were fit for the character I was to
appear in, of my mistress's companion, observing withal,
that on the first impressions of my figure much might
depend; and, as they well judged, the prospect of ex-
changing my country cloaths for London finery, made the
clause of confinement digest perfectly well with me.  But
the truth was, Mrs. Brown did not care that I should be
seen or talked to by any, either of her customers, or her
DOES (as they call'd the girls provided for them), till
she had secured a good market for my maidenhead, which I
had at least all the appearances of having brought into her
     To slip over minutes of no importance to the main of my
story, I pass the interval to bed-time, in which I was more
and more pleas'd with the views that opened to me, of an 
easy service under these good people; and after supper being
shew'd up to bed, Miss Phoebe, who observed a kind of reluc-
tance in me to strip and go to bed, in my shift, before her,
now the maid was withdrawn, came up to me, and beginning with
unpinning my handkerchief and gown, soon encouraged me to go
on with undressing myself; and, still blushing at now seeing
myself naked to my shift, I hurried to get under the bed-
cloaths out of sight.  Phoebe laugh'd and was not long before
she placed herself by my side.  She was about five and twenty,
by her most suspicious account, in which, according to all
appearances, she must have sunk at least ten good years; 
allowance, too, being made for the havoc which a long course
of hackneyship and hot waters must have made of her consti-
tution, and which had already brought on, upon the spur, 
that stale stage in which those of her profession are re-
duced to think of SHOWING company, instead of SEEING it.
     No sooner then was this precious substitute of my
mistress's laid down, but she, who was never out of her way
when any occasion of lewdness presented itself, turned to
me, embraced and kiss'd me with great eagerness.  This was
new, this was odd; but imputing it to nothing but pure kind-
ness, which, for aught I knew, it might be the London way 
to express in that manner, I was determin'd not to be behind
hand with her, and returned her the kiss and embrace, with 
     Encouraged by this, her hands became extremely free,
and wander'd over my whole body, with touches, squeezes,
pressures, that rather warm'd and surpriz'd me with their
     The flattering praises she intermingled with these in-
vasions, contributed also not a little to bribe my passive-
ness; and, knowing no ill, I feared none, especially from 
one who had prevented all doubt of her womanhood by conduct-
ing my hands to a pair of breasts that hung loosely down,
in a size and volume that full sufficiently distinguished
her sex, to me at least, who had never made any other com-
     I lay then all tame and passive as she could wish, whilst
her freedom raised no other emotions but those of a strange,
and, till then, unfelt pleasure.  Every part of me was open 
and exposed to the licentious courses of her hands, which,
like a lambent fire, ran over my whole body, and thaw'd all
     My breasts, if it is not too bold a figure to call so
two hard, firm, rising hillocks, that just began to shew them-
selves, or signify anything to the touch, employ'd and amus'd
her hands a-while, till, slipping down lower, over a smooth
track, she could just feel the soft silky down that had but a
few months before put forth and garnish'd the mount-pleasant
of those parts, and promised to spread a grateful shelter over
the seat of the most exquisite sensation, and which had been,
till that instant, the seat of the most insensible innocence.
Her fingers play'd and strove to twine in the young tendrils 
of that moss, which nature has contrived at once for use and
     But, not contented with these outer posts, she now 
attempts the main spot, and began to twitch, to insinuate,
and at length to force an introduction of a finger into the
quick itself, in such a manner, that had she not proceeded
by insensible gradations that inflamed me beyond the power of
modesty to oppose its resistance to their progress, I should
have jump'd out of bed and cried for help against such strange
     Instead of which, her lascivious touches had lighted up
a new fire that wanton'd through all my veins, but fix'd with
violence in that center appointed them by nature, where the
first strange hands were now busied in feeling, squeezing,
compressing the lips, then opening them again, with a finger
between, till an "Oh!" express'd her hurting me, where the
narrowness of the unbroken passage refused it entrance to any
     In the meantime, the extension of my limbs, languid
stretchings, sighs, short heavings, all conspired to assure
that experienced wanton that I was more pleased than offended
at her proceedings, which she seasoned with repeated kisses
and exclamations, such as "Oh! what a charming creature thou
art! . . . What a happy man will he be that first makes a 
woman of you! . . . Oh! that I were a man for your sake! ...
with the like broken expressions, interrupted by kisses as
fierce and fervent as ever I received from the other sex.
     For my part, I was transported, confused, and out of
myself; feelings so new were too much for me.  My heated 
and alarm'd senses were in a tumult that robbed me of all
liberty of thought; tears of pleasure gush'd from my eyes,
and somewhat assuaged the fire that rag'd all over me.
     Phoebe, herself, the hackney'd, thorough-bred Phoebe, 
to whom all modes and devices of pleasure were known and
familiar, found, it seems, in this exercise of her art to
break young girls, the gratification of one of those arbi-
trary tastes, for which there is no accounting.  Not that
she hated men, or did not even prefer them to her own sex;
but when she met with such occasions as this was, a satiety
of enjoyments in the common road, perhaps too, a secret
bias, inclined her to make the most of pleasure, wherever
she could find it, without distinction of sexes.  In this
view, now well assured that she had, by her touches, suf-
ficiently inflamed me for her purpose, she roll'd down
the bed-cloaths gently, and I saw myself stretched nak'd,
my shift being turned up to my neck, whilst I had no power
or sense to oppose it.  Even my glowing blushes expressed
more desire than modesty, whilst the candle, left (to be
sure not undesignedly) burning, threw a full light on my
     "No!" says Phoebe, "you must not, my sweet girl, think
to hide all these treasures from me.  My sight must be
feasted as well as my touch . . . I must devour with my 
eyes this springing BOSOM . . . Suffer me to kiss it . . .
I have not seen it enough . . . Let me kiss it once more
. . . What firm, smooth, white flesh is here! . . . How
delicately shaped! . . . Then this delicious down!  Oh!
let me view the small, dear, tender cleft! . . . This is
too much, I cannot bear it! . . . I must . . . I must . . ."
Here she took my hand, and in a transport carried it where
you will easily guess.  But what a difference in the state
of the same thing! . . . A spreading thicket of bushy curls
marked the full-grown, complete woman.  Then the cavity to 
which she guided my hand easily received it; and as soon as
she felt it within her, she moved herself to and fro, with
so rapid a friction that I presently withdrew it, wet and
clammy, when instantly Phoebe grew more composed, after two
or three sighs, and heart-fetched Oh's! and giving me a
kiss that seemed to exhale her soul through her lips, she
replaced the bed-cloaths over us.  What pleasure she had
found I will not say; but this I know, that the first sparks
of kindling nature, the first ideas of pollution, were 
caught by me that night; and that the acquaintance and 
communication with the bad of our own sex, is often as fatal
to innocence as all the seductions of the other.  But to go
on.  When Phoebe was restor'd to that calm, which I was far
from the enjoyment of myself, she artfully sounded me on all
the points necessary to govern the designs of my virtuous
mistress on me, and by my answers, drawn from pure undis-
sembled nature, she had no reason but to promise herself all
imaginable success, so far as it depended on my ignorance,
     After a sufficient length of dialogue, my bedfellow left
me to my rest, and I fell asleep, through pure weariness from
the violent emotions I had been led into, when nature (which
had been too warmly stir'd and fermented to subside without
allaying by some means or other) relieved me by one of those
luscious dreams, the transports of which are scarce inferior
     We breakfasted, and the tea things were scarce removed,
when in were brought two bundles of linen and wearing apparel:
in short, all the necessaries for rigging me out, as they
     In the morning I awoke about ten, perfectly gay and 
refreshed.  Phoebe was up before me, and asked me in the
kindest manner how I did, how I had rested, and if I was
ready for breakfast, carefully, at the same time, avoiding
to increase the confusion she saw I was in, at looking her
in the face, by any hint of the night's bed scene.  I told
her if she pleased I would get up, and begin any work she
would be pleased to set me about.  She smil'd; presently
the maid brought in the tea-equipage, and I had just hud-
dled my cloaths on, when in waddled my mistress.  I expected
no less than to be told of, if not chid for, my late rising,
when I was agreeably disappointed by her compliments on my
pure and fresh looks.  I was "a bud of beauty" (this was her
style), "and how vastly all the fine men would admire me!" 
to all which my answer did not, I can assure you, wrong my
breeding; they were as simple and silly as they could wish,
and, no doubt, flattered them infinitely more than had they
proved me enlightened by education and a knowledge of the
     Imagine to yourself, Madam, how my little coquette
heart flutter'd with joy at the sight of a white lute-string,
flower'd with silver, scoured indeed, but passed on me for
spick-and-span new, a Brussels lace cap, braided shoes, and
the rest in proportion, all second-hand finery, and procured
instantly for the occasion, by the diligence and industry of
the good Mrs. Brown, who had already a chapman for me in the
house, before whom my charms were to pass in review; for he
had not only, in course, insisted on a previous sight of the
premises, but also on immediate surrender to him, in case of
his agreeing for me; concluding very wisely that such a place
as I was in was of the hottest to trust the keeping of such
     The care of dressing, and tricking me out for the 
market, was then left to Phoebe, who acquitted herself, if
not well, at least perfectly to the satisfaction of every
thing but my impatience of seeing myself dress'd.  When it
was over, and I view'd myself in the glass, I was, no doubt,
too natural, too artless, to hide my childish joy at the
change; a change, in the real truth, for much the worse,
since I must have much better become the neat easy simplicity
of my rustic dress than the awkward, untoward, taudry finery
     Phoebe's compliments, however, in which her own share
in dressing me was not forgot, did not a little confirm me
in the first notions I had ever entertained concerning my
person; which, be it said without vanity, was then tolerable
to justify a taste for me, and of which it may not be out of
     I was tall, yet not too tall for my age, which, as I
before remark'd, was barely turned of fifteen; my shape 
perfectly straight, thin waisted, and light and free, without
owing any thing to stays; my hair was a glossy auburn, and
as soft as silk, flowing down my neck in natural buckles, and
did not a little set off the whiteness of a smooth skin; my
face was rather too ruddy, though its features were delicate,
and the shape a roundish oval, except where a pit on my chin
had far from a disagreeable effect; my eyes were as black as 
can be imagin'd, and rather languishing than sparkling, ex-
cept on certain occasions, when I have been told they struck
fire fast enough; my teeth, which I ever carefully perserv'd,
were small, even and white; my bosom was finely rais'd, and
one might then discern rather the promise, than the actual
growth, of the round, firm breasts, that in a little time
made that promise good.  In short, all the points of beauty
that are most universally in request, I had, or at least my
vanity forbade me to appeal from the decision of our sove-
reign judges the men, who all, that I ever knew at least, 
gave it thus highly in my favour; and I met with, even in
my own sex, some that were above denying me that justice,
whilst others praised me yet more unsuspectedly, by endea-
vouring to detract from me, in points of person and figure
that I obviously excelled in.  This is, I own, too strong of
self praise; but should I not be ungrateful to nature, and 
to a form to which I owe such singular blessings of pleasure
and fortune, were I to suppress, through and affectation of
     Well then, dress'd I was, and little did it then enter
into my head that all this gay attire was no more than deck-
ing the victim out for sacrifice, whilst I innocently attri-
buted all to mere friendship and kindness in the sweet good
Mrs. Brown; who, I was forgetting to mention, had, under
pretence of keeping my money safe, got from me, without the
least hesitation, the driblet (so I now call it) which re-
     After some little time most agreeably spent before the 
glass, in scarce self-admiration, since my new dress had by
much the greatest share in it, I was sent for down to the
parlour, where the old lady saluted me, and wished me joy
of my new cloaths, which she was not asham'd to say, fitted
me as if I had worn nothing but the finest all my life-time;
but what was it she could not see me silly enough to swallow?
At the same time, she presented me to another cousin of her
own creation, an elderly gentleman, who got up, at my entry
into the room, and on my dropping a curtsy to him, saluted
me, and seemed a little affronted that I had only presented
my cheek to him; a mistake, which, if one, he immediately
corrected, by glewing his lips to mine, with an ardour which
his figure had not at all disposed me to thank him for; his
figure, I say, than which nothing could be more shocking or
detestable: for ugly, and disagreeable, were terms too gentle
     Imagine to yourself a man rather past threescore, short
and ill-made, with a yellow cadaverous hue, great goggling
eyes that stared as if he was strangled; and out-mouth from
two more properly tusks than teeth, livid-lips, and breath
like a jake's: then he had a peculiar ghastliness in his grin
that made him perfectly frightful, if not dangerous to women
with child; yet, made as he was thus in mock of man, he was
so blind to his own staring deformities as to think himself
born for pleasing, and that no woman could see him with im-
punity: in consequence of which idea, he had lavish'd great
sums on such wretches as could gain upon themselves to pre-
tend love to his person, whilst to those who had not art or
patience to dissemble the horror it inspir'd, he behaved 
even brutally.  Impotence, more than necessity, made him
seek in variety the provocative that was wanting to raise
him to the pitch of enjoyment, which too he often saw him-
self baulked of, by the failure of his powers: and this
always threw him into a fit of rage, which he wreak'd, as
far as he durst, on the innocent objects of his fit of
     This then was the monster to which my conscientious
benefactress, who had long been his purveyor in this way,
had doom'd me, and sent for me down purposely for his ex-
amination.  Accordingly she made me stand up before him,
turn'd me round, unpinn'd my handkerchief, remark'd to him
the rise and fall, the turn and whiteness of a bosom just
beginning to fill; then made me walk, and took even a han-
dle from the rusticity of my gait, to inflame the inventory
of my charms: in short, she omitted no point of jockeyship;
to which he only answer'd by gracious nods of approbation,
whilst he look'd goats and monkies at me: for I sometimes
stole a corner glance at him, and encountering his fiery,
eager stare, looked another way from pure horror and af-
fright, which he, doubtless in character, attributed to
nothing more than maiden modesty, or at least the affec-
     However, I was soon dismiss'd, and reconducted to my
room by Phoebe, who stuck close to me, not leaving me alone
and at leisure to make such reflections as might naturally
rise to any one, not an idiot, on such a scene as I had just
gone through; but to my shame be it confess'd, such was my
invincible stupidity, or rather portentous innocence, that 
I did not yet open my eyes to Mrs. Brown's designs, and saw
nothing in this titular cousin of hers but a shocking hide-
ous person which did not at all concern me, unless that my
     Phoebe, however, began to sift the state and pulses of
my heart towards this monster, asking me how I should approve
of such a fine gentleman for a husband?  (fine gentleman, I
suppose she called him, from his being daubed with lace).  I
answered her very naturally, that I had no thoughts of a hus-
band, but that if I was to choose one, it should be among my
own degree, sure!  So much had my aversion to that wretch's
hideous figure indisposed me to all "fine gentlemen," and
confounded my ideas, as if those of that rank had been neces-
sarily cast in the same mould that he was!  But Phoebe was
not to be beat off so, but went on with her endeavours to
melt and soften me for the purposes of my reception into that
hospitable house: and whilst she talked of the sex in general,
she had no reason to despair of a compliance, which more than
one reason shewed her would be easily enough obtained of me;
but then she had too much experience not to discover that my
particular fix'd aversion to that frightful cousin would be a
block not so readily to be removed, as suited the consum-
     Mother Brown had in the mean time agreed the terms with
this liquorish old goat, which I afterwards understood were
to be fifty guineas peremptory for the liberty of attempting
me, and a hundred more at the compleat gratification of his
desires, in the triumph over my virginity: and as for me, I
was to be left entirely at the discretion of his liking and
generosity.  This unrighteous contract being thus settled,
he was so eager to be put in possession, that he insisted 
on being introduc'd to drink tea with me that afternoon, 
when we were to be left alone; nor would he hearken to the
procuress's remonstrances, that I was not sufficiently pre-
pared and ripened for such an attack; that I was too green
and untam'd, having been scarce twenty-four hours in the
house: it is the character of lust to be impatient, and his
vanity arming him against any supposition of other than the
common  resistance of a maid on those occasions, made him 
reject all proposals of a delay, and my dreadful trial was
     At dinner, Mrs. Brown and Phoebe did nothing but run
riot in praises of this wonderful cousin, and how happy
that woman would be that he would favour with his addresses;
in short my two gossips exhausted all their rhetoric to
persuade me to accept them: "that the gentleman was violently
smitten with me at first sight . . . that he would make my
fortune if I would be a good girl and not stand in my own
light . . . that I should trust his honour . . . that I
should be made for ever, and have a chariot to go abroad in
. . . ," with all such stuff as was fit to turn the head of
such a silly ignorant girl as I then was: but luckily here
my aversion had taken already such deep root in me, my heart
was so strongly defended from him by my senses, that wanting
the art to mask my sentiments, I gave them no hopes of their
employer's succeeding, at least very easily, with me.  The
glass too march'd pretty quick, with a view, I suppose, to
make a friend of the warmth of my constitution, in the
     Thus they kept me pretty long at table, and about six
in the evening, after I was retired to my own apartment, and
the tea board was set, enters my venerable mistress, follow'd
close by that satyr, who came in grinning in a way peculiar
to him, and by his odious presence confirm'd me in all the
sentiments of detestation which his first appearance had
     He sat down fronting me, and all tea time kept ogling
me in a manner that gave me the utmost pain and confusion,
all the marks of which he still explained to be my bash-
     Tea over, the commoding old lady pleaded urgent busi-
ness (which indeed was true) to go out, and earnestly desir'd
me to entertain her cousin kindly till she came back, both
for my own sake and her's; and then with a "Pray, sir, be
very good, be very tender of the sweet child," she went out
of the room, leaving me staring, with my mouth open, and un-
prepar'd, by the suddenness of her departure, to oppose it.
     We were now alone; and on that idea a sudden fit of 
trembling seiz'd me.  I was so afraid, without a precise
notion of why, and what I had to fear, that I sat on the
settee, by the fire-side, motionless, and petrified, with-
out life or spirit, not knowing how to look or how to stir.
     But long I was not suffered to remain in this state of
stupefaction: the monster squatted down by me on the settee,
and without farther ceremony or preamble, flings his arms
about my neck, and drawing me pretty forcibly towards him,
oblig'd me to receive, in spite of my struggles to disengage
from him, his pestilential kisses, which quite overcame me.
Finding me then next to senseless, and unresisting, he tears
off my neck handkerchief, and laid all open there to his
eyes and hands: still I endur'd all without flinching, till
embolden'd by my sufferance and silence, for I had not the
power to speak or cry out, he attempted to lay me down on 
the settee, and I felt his hand on the lower part of my
naked thighs, which were cross'd, and which he endeavoured
to unlock . . . Oh then!  I was roused out of my passive
endurance, and springing from him with an activity he was
not prepar'd for, threw myself at his feet, and begg'd him,
in the most moving tone, not to be rude, and that he would
not hurt me:--"Hurt you, my dear?" says the brute; "I intend
you no harm . . . has not the old lady told you that I love
you? . . . that I shall do handsomely by you?"  "She has
indeed, sir," said I; "but I cannot love you, indeed I can
not! . . . pray let me alone . . .  yes! I will love you
dearly if you will let me alone, and go away . . . "  But I
was talking to the wind; for whether my tears, my attitude,
or the disorder of my dress prov'd fresh incentives, or
whether he was not under the dominion of desires he could
not bridle, but snorting and foaming with lust and rage, he
renews his attack, seizes me, and again attempts to extend
and fix me on the settee: in which he succeeded so far as to
lay me along, and even to toss my petticoats over my head,
and lay my thighs bare, which I obstinately kept close, nor
could he, though he attempted with his knee to force them
open, effect it so as to stand fair for being master of the
main avenue; he was unbuttoned, both waistcoat and breeches,
yet I only felt the weight of his body upon me, whilst I lay
struggling with indignation, and dying with terror; but he
stopped all of a sudden, and got off, panting, blowing, curs-
ing, and repeating "old and ugly!" for so I had very natur-
     The brute had, it seems, as I afterwards understood,
brought on, by his eagerness and struggle, the ultimate
period of his hot fit of lust, which his power was too short
liv'd to carry him through the full execution of; of which
     When it was over he bid me, with a tone of displeasure,
get up, saying that he would not do me the honour to think
of me any more . . . that the old bitch might look out for
another cully . . . that he would not be fool'd so by e'er
a country mock modesty in England . . . that he supposed I
had left my maidenhead with some hobnail in the country,
and was come to dispose of my skin-milk in town, with a
volley of the like abuse; which I listened to with more
pleasure than ever fond woman did to protestations of love
from her darling minion: for, incapable as I was of re-
ceiving any addition to my perfect hatred and aversion to
him, I look'd on this railing as my security against his
     Yet, plain as Mrs. Brown's views were now come out, I
had not the heart or spirit to open my eyes to them: still
I could not part with my dependence on that beldam, so
much did I think myself her's, soul and body: or rather, I
sought to deceive myself with the continuation of my good
opinion of her, and chose to wait the worst at her hands
sooner than be turn'd out to starve in the streets, with-
out a penny of money or a friend to apply to: these fears
     Whilst this confusion of ideas was passing in my head,
and I sat pensive by the fire, with my eyes brimming with 
tears, my neck still bare, and my cap fall'n off in the 
struggle, so that my hair was in the disorder you may guess,
the villain's lust began, I suppose, to be again in flow, at
the sight of all that bloom of youth which presented itself
to his view, a bloom yet unenjoy'd, and of course not yet
     After some pause, he ask'd me, with a tone of voice
mightily softened, whether I would make it up with him
before the old lady returned and all should be well; he
would restore me his affections, at the same time offering
to kiss me and feel my breasts.  But now my extreme aver-
sion, my fears, my indignation, all acting upon me, gave me
a spirit not natural to me, so that breaking loose from him,
I ran to the bell and rang it, before he was aware, with
such violence and effect as brought up the maid to know what
was the matter, or whether the gentleman wanted any thing;
and before he could proceed to greater extremities, she
bounc'd into the room, and seeing me stretch'd on the floor,
my hair all dishevell'd, my nose gushing out blood, which 
did not a little tragedize the scene, and my odious per-
secutor still intent of pushing his brutal point, unmoved by
all my cries and distress, she was herself confounded and
     As much, however, as Martha might be prepared and 
hardened to transactions of this sort, all womanhood must
have been out of her heart, could she have seen this un-
mov'd.  Besides that, on the face of things, she imagined
that matters had gone greater lengths than they really
had, and that the courtesy of the house had been actually
consummated on me, and flung me into the condition I was
in: in this notion she instantly took my part, and advis'd
the gentleman to go down and leave me to recover myself,
and "that all would be soon over with me . . . that when
Mrs. Brown and Phoebe, who were gone out, were return'd,
they would take order for every thing to his satisfaction
. . . that nothing would be lost by a little patience with
the poor tender thing . . . that for her part she was . . .
frighten'd . . . she could not tell what to say to such
doings . . . but that she would stay by me till my mistress
came home."  As the wench said all this in a resolute tone,
and the monster himself began to perceive that things would
not mend by his staying, he took his hat and went out of 
the room, murmuring, and pleating his brows like an old ape,
so that I was delivered from the horrors of his detestable
     As soon as he was gone, Martha very tenderly offered
me her assistance in any thing, and would have got me some
hartshorn drops, and put me to bed; which last, I at first
positively refused, in the fear that the monster might re-
turn and take me at that advantage.  However, with much
persuasion, and assurances that I should not be molested
that night, she prevailed on me to lie down; and indeed I
was so weakened by my struggles, so dejected by my fearful
apprehensions, so terror-struck, that I had not power to
sit up, or hardly to give answers to the questions with
     Such too, and so cruel was my fate, that I dreaded 
the sight of Mrs. Brown, as if I had been the criminal
and she the person injur'd; a mistake which you will not
think so strange, on distinguishing that neither virtue
nor principles had the least share in the defence I had
made, but only the particular aversion I had conceiv'd
against the first brutal and frightful invader of my
     I pass'd then the time till Mrs. Brown's return home, 
under all the agitations of fear and despair that may 
     About eleven at night my two ladies came home, and hav-
ing receiv'd rather a favourable account from Martha, who
had run down to let them in, for Mr. Crofts (that was the
name of my brute) was gone out of the house, after waiting
till he had tired his patience for Mrs. Brown's return, they
came thundering up-stairs, and seeing me pale, my face
bloody, and all the marks of the most thorough dejection,
they employed themselves more to comfort and re-inspirit me,
than in making me the reproaches I was weak enough to fear,
I who had so many juster and stronger to retort upon them.
     Mrs. Brown withdrawn, Phoebe came presently to bed to
me, and what with the answers she drew from me, what with
her own method of palpably satisfying herself, she soon dis-
covered that I had been more frighted than hurt; upon which
I suppose, being herself seiz'd with sleep, and reserving
her lectures and instructions till the next morning, she
left me, properly speaking, to my unrest; for, after tossing
and turning the greatest part of the night, and tormenting
myself with the falsest notions and apprehensions of things,
I fell, through mere fatigue, into a kind of delirious doze,
out of which I waded late in the morning, in a violent fever:
a circumstance which was extremely critical to reprieve me,
at least for a time, from the attacks of a wretch infinitely
     The interested care that was taken of me during my ill-
ness, in order to restore me to a condition of making good
the bawd's engagements, or of enduring further trials, and
however such an effect on my grateful disposition, that I
even thought myself oblig'd to my undoers for their atten-
tion to promote my recovery; and, above all, for the keeping
out of my sight of that brutal ravisher, the author of my
disorder, on their finding I was too strongly mov'd at the
     Youth is soon raised, and a few days were sufficient to
conquer the fury of my fever: but, what contributed most to
my perfect recovery and to my reconciliation with life, was
the timely news that Mr. Crofts, who was a merchant of con-
siderable dealings, was arrested at the King's suit, for 
nearly forty thousand pounds, on account of his driving a
certain contraband trade, and that his affairs were so des-
perate that even were it in his inclination, it would not
be in his power to renew his designs upon me: for he was
instantly thrown into a prison, which it was not likely he
     Mrs. Brown, who had touched his fifty guineas, advanc'd
to so little purpose, and lost all hopes of the remaining
hundred, began to look upon my treatment of him with a more
favourable eye; and as they had observ'd my temper to be
perfectly tractable and conformable to their views, all the
girls that compos'd her flock were suffered to visit me, and
had their cue to dispose me, by their conversation, to a
perfect resignation of myself to Mrs. Brown's direction.
     Accordingly they were let in upon me, and all that
frolic and thoughtless gaiety in which those giddy creatures
consume their leisure made me envy a condition of which I 
only saw the fair side; insomuch, that the being one of them
became even my ambitionP a disposition which they all care-
fully cultivated; and I wanted now nothing but to restore my
health, that I might be able to undergo the ceremony of the
     Conversation, example, all, in short, contributed, in
that house, to corrupt my native purity, which had taken no
root in education; whilst not the inflammable principal of
pleasure, so easily fired at my age, made strange work
within me, and all the modesty I was brought up in the
habit, not the instruction of, began to melt away like dew
before the sun's heat; not to mention that I made a vice of
necessity, from the constant fears I had of being turn'd
     I was soon pretty well recover'd, and at certain hours
allow'd to range all over the house, but cautiously kept
from seeing any company till the arrival of Lord B . . .,
from Bath, to whom Mrs. Brown, in respect to his experi-
enced generosity on such occasions, proposed to offer the 
perusal ot that trinket of mine, which bears so great an
imaginary value; and his lordship being expected in town
in less than a fortnight, Mrs. Brown judged I would be
entirely renewed in beauty and freshness by that time, and
afford her the chance of a better bargain than she had
     In the meantime, I was so thoroughly, as they call it,
brought over, so tame to their whistle, that, had my cage
door been set open, I had no idea that I ought to fly any-
where, sooner than stay where I was; nor had I the least
sense of regretting my condition, but waited very quietly
for whatever Mrs. Brown should order concerning me; who on
her side, by herself and her agents, took more than the
necessary precautions to lull and lay asleep all just re-
     Preachments of morality over the left shoulder; a life
of joy painted in the gayest colours; caresses, promises,
indulgent treatment: nothing, in short, was wanting to do-
mesticate me entirely and to prevent my going out anywhere
to get better advice.  Alas!  I dream'd of no such thing.
     Hitherto I had been indebted only to the girls of the
house for the corruption of my innocence: their luscious
talk, in which modesty was far from respected, their des-
cription of their engagements with men, had given me a 
tolerable insight into the nature and mysteries of their
profession, at the same time that they highly provok'd an
itch of florid warm-spirited blood through every vein: but
above all, my bed-fellow Phoebe, whose pupil I more immedi-
ately was, exerted her talents in giving me the first
tinctures of pleasure: whilst nature, now warm'd and wan-
toned with discoveries so interesting, piqu'd a curiosity
which Phoebe artfully whetted, and leading me from question
to question of her own suggestion, explain'd to me all the
mysteries of Venus.  But I could not long remain in such a 
house as that, without being an eye-witness of more than I
     One day, about twelve at noon, being thoroughly re-
cover'd of my fever, I happen'd to be in Mrs. Brown's dark
closet, where I had not been half an hour, resting upon the
maid's settle-bed, before I heard a rustling in the bed-
chamber, separated from the closet only by two sash-doors,
before the glasses of which were drawn two yellow damask
curtains, but not so close as to exclude the full view of 
     I instantly crept softly, and posted myself so, that 
seeing every thing minutely, I could not myself be seen; 
and who should come in but the venerable mother Abbess
herself! handed in by a tall, brawny young Horse-grenadier,
moulded in the Hercules style: in fine, the choice of the
most experienced dame, in those affairs, in all London.
     Oh! how still and hush did I keep at my stand, lest
any noise should baulk my curiosity, of bring Madam into
     But I had not much reason to fear either, for she was
so entirely taken up with her present great concern, that
she had no sense of attention to spare to any thing else.
     Droll was it to see that clumsy fat figure of hers flop
down on the foot of the bed, opposite to the closet-door, so
     Her paramour sat down by her: he seemed to be a man of
very few words, and a great stomach; for proceeding instant-
ly to essentials, he gave her some hearty smacks, and thrust-
ing his hands into her breasts, disengag'd them from her
stays, in scorn of whose confinement they broke loose, and
swagged down, navel-low at least.  A more enormous pair did
my eyes never behold, nor of a worse colour, flagging-soft,
and most lovingly contiguous: yet such as they were, this
neck-beef eater seem'd to paw them with a most uninvitable
gust, seeking in vain to confine or cover one of them with a
hand scarce less than a shoulder of mutton.  After toying
with them thus some time, as if they had been worth it, he
laid her down pretty briskly, and canting up her petticoats,
made barely a mask of them to her broad red face, that
     As he stood on one side, for a minute or so, unbutton-
ing his waist-coat and breeches, her fat, brawny thighs hung
down, and the whole greasy landscape lay fairly open to my
view; a wide open-mouth'd gap, overshaded with a grizzly
bush, seemed held out like a beggar's wallet for its pro-
     But I soon had my eyes called off by a more striking
     Her sturdy stallion had now unbutton'd, and produced
naked, stiff, and erect, that wonderful machine, which I
had never seen before, and which, for the interest my own
seat of pleasure began to take furiously in it, I star'd at
with all the eyes I had: however, my senses were too much
flurried, too much concenter'd in that now burning spot of
mine, to observe any thing more than in general the make
and turn of that instrument, from which the instinct of
nature, yet more than all I had heard of it, now strongly
informed me I was to expect that supreme pleasure which she
had placed in the meeting of those parts so admirably fitted
     Long, however, the young spark did not remain before
giving it two or three shakes, by way of brandishing it; he
threw himself upon her, and his back being now towards me, I
could only take his being ingulph'd for granted, by the di-
rections he mov'd in, and the impossibility of missing so 
staring a mark; and now the bed shook, the curtains rattled
so, that I could scarce hear the sighs and murmurs, the
heaves and pantings that accompanied the action, from the
beginning to the end; the sound and sight of which thrill'd 
to the very soul of me, and made every vein of my body cir-
culate liquid fires: the emotion grew so violent that it 
     Prepared then, and disposed as I was by the discourse
of my companions, and Phoebe's minute detail of everything,
no wonder that such a sight gave the last dying blow to my
     Whilst they were in the heat of the action, guided by 
nature only, I stole my hand up my petticoats, and with 
fingers all on fire, seized, and yet more inflamed that 
center of all my senses: my heart palpitated, as if it
would force its way through my bosom; I breath'd with pain;
I twisted my thighs, squeezed, and compressed the lips of
that virgin slit, and following mechanically the example of 
Phoebe's manual operation on it, as far as I could find
admission, brought on at last the critical extasy, the
melting flow, into which nature, spent with excess of
     After which, my senses recover'd coolness enough to 
observe the rest of the transaction between this happy
     The young fellow had just dismounted, when the old
lady immediately sprung up, with all the vigour of youth,
derived, no doubt, from her late refreshment; and making
him sit down, began in her turn to kiss him, to pat and
pinch his cheeks, and play with his hair: all which he
receiv'd with an air of indifference and coolness, that
shew'd him to me much altered from what he was when he
     My pious governess, however, not being above calling
in auxiliaries, unlocks a little case of cordials that 
stood near the bed, and made him pledge her in a very
plentiful dram: after which, and a little amorous parley,
Madam sat herself down upon the same place, at the bed's
foot; and the young fellow standing sideway by her, she,
with the greatest effrontery imaginable, unbuttons his
breeches, and removing his shirt, draws out his affair, so
shrunk and diminish'd, that I could not but remember the
difference, now crestfallen, or just faintly lifting its
head: but our experienc'd matron very soon, by chafing it
with her hands, brought it to swell to that size and erec-
     I admired then, upon a fresh account, and with a nicer
survey, the texture of that capital part of man: the flam-
ing red head as it stood uncapt, the whiteness of the
shaft, and the shrub growth of curling hair that embrowned
the roots of it, the roundish bag that dangled down from
it, all exacted my eager attention, and renewed my flame. 
But, as the main affair was now at the point the industrious
dame had laboured to bring it to, she was not in the humour
to put off the payment of her pains, but laying herself
down, drew him gently upon her, and thus they finish'd in
     This over, they both went out lovingly together, the 
old lady having first made him a present, as near as I
could observe, of three or four pieces; he being not only 
her particular favourite on account of his performances, 
but a retainer to the house; from whose sight she had taken
great care hitherto to secrete me, lest he might not have
had patience to wait for my lord's arrival, but have in-
sisted on being his taster, which the old lady was under
too much subjection to him to dare dispute with him; for
every girl of the house fell to him in course, and the old
lady only now and then got her turn, in consideration of 
the maintenance he had, and which he could scarce be
     As soon as I heard them go down-stairs, I stole up 
softly to my own room, out of which I had luckily not been
miss'd; there I began to breathe freer, and to give a loose
to those warm emotions which the sight of such an encounter
had raised in me.  I laid me down on the bed, stretched
myself out, joining and ardently wishing, and requiring any
means to divert or allay the rekindled rage and tumult of 
my desires, which all pointed strongly to their pole: man.
I felt about the bed as if I sought for something that I
grasp'd in my waking dream, and not finding it, could have
cry'd for vexation; every part of me glowing with stimul-
ating fires.  At length, I resorted to the only present
remedy, that of vain attempts at digitation, where the
smallness of the theatre did not yet afford room enough for
action, and where the pain my fingers gave me, in striving
for admission, tho' they procured me a slight satisfaction
for the present, started an apprehension, which I could not
be easy till I had communicated to Phoebe, and received her
     The opportunity, however, did not offer till next
morning, for Phoebe did not come to bed till long after
I was gone to sleep.  As soon then as we were both awake,
it was but in course to bring our ly-a-bed chat to land on
the subject of my uneasiness: to which a recital of the 
love scene I had thus, by chance, been spectatress of,
     Phoebe could not hear it to the end without more than
one interruption by peals of laughter, and my ingenuous way
of relating matters did not a little heighten the joke to 
     But, on her sounding me how the sight had affected me,
without mincing or hiding the pleasurable emotions it had
inspir'd me with, I told her at the same time that one re-
mark had perplex'd me, and that very considerably.
---"Aye!" say she, "what was that?" --- "Why," replied I,
"having very curiously and attentively compared the size of
that enormous machine, which did not appear, at least to my
fearful imagination, less than my wrist, and at least three 
of my handfuls long, to that of the tender small part of me
which was framed to receive it, I can not conceive its being
possible to afford it entrance without dying, perhaps in the
greatest pain, since you well know that even a finger thrust
in there hurts me beyond bearing . . . As to my mistress's
and yours, I can plainly distinguish the different dimen-
sions of them from mine, palpable to the touch, and visible
to the eye; so that, in short, great as the promis'd plea-
sure may be, I am afraid of the pain of the experiment."
     Phoebe at this redoubled her laugh, and whilst I ex-
pected a very serious solution of my doubts and apprehen-
sions in this matter, only told me that she never heard of
a mortal wound being given in those parts by that terrible
weapon, and that some she knew younger, and as delicately
made as myself, had outlived the operation; that she be-
lieved, at the worst, I should take a great deal of kill-
ing; that true it was, there was a great diversity of sizes
in those parts, owing to nature, child-bearing, frequent
over-stretching with unmerciful machines, but that at a 
certain age and habit of body, even the most experienc'd in
those affairs could not well distinguish between the maid
and the woman, supposing too an absence of all artifice,
and things in their natural situation: but that since
chance had thrown in my way one sight of that sort, she
would procure me another, that should feast my eyes more 
delicately, and go a great way in the cure of my fears from
     On this she asked me if I knew Polly Philips.  "Un-
doubtedly," says I, "the fair girl which was so tender of
me when I was sick, and has been, as you told me, but two
months in the house.":  "The same," says Phoebe.  "You must
know then, she is kept by a young Genoese merchant, whom
his uncle, who is immensely rich, and whose darling he is,
sent over here with an English merchant, his friend, on a
pretext of settling some accounts, but in reality to humour
his inclinations for travelling, and seeing the world.  He
met casually with this Polly once in company, and taking a
liking to her, makes it worth her while to keep entirely to
him.  He comes to her here twice or thrice a week, and she
receives him in her light closet up one pair of stairs,
where he enjoys her in a taste, I suppose, peculiar to the
heat, or perhaps the caprices of his own country.  I say no
more, but to-morrow being his day, you shall see what passes
between them, from a place only known to your mistress and
     You may be sure, in the ply I was now taking, I had no
objection to the proposal, and was rather a tip-toe for its
     At five in the evening, next day, Phoebe, punctual to 
her promise, came to me as I sat alone in my own room, and
     We went down the back-stairs very softly, and opening
the door of a dark closet, where there was some old furni-
ture kept, and some cases of liquor, she drew me in after
her, and fastening the door upon us, we had no light but
what came through a long crevice in the partition between
ours and the light closet, where the scene of action lay;
so that sitting on those low cases, we could, with the 
greatest ease, as well as clearness, see all objects (our-
selves unseen), only by applying our eyes close to the cre-
vice, where the moulding of a panel had warped, or started
     The young gentleman was the first person I saw, with
his back directly towards me, looking at a print.  Polly
was not yet come: in less than a minute tho', the door 
opened, and she came in; and at the noise the door made he
turned about, and came to meet her, with an air of the 
     After saluting her, he led her to a couch that fronted
us, where they both sat down, and the young Genoese help'd
her to a glass of wine, with some Naples bisket on a salver.
     Presently, when they had exchanged a few kisses, and
questions in broken English on one side, he began to un-
     As if this had been the signal agreed on for pulling
off all their cloaths, a scheme which the heat of the season
perfectly favoured, Polly began to draw her pins, and as she
had no stays to unlace, she was in a trice, with her gallant's
officious assistance, undress'd to all but her shift.
     When he saw this, his breeches were immediately loos-
en'd, waist and knee bands, and slipped over his ankles,
clean off; his shirt collar was unbuttoned too: then, first
giving Polly an encouraging kiss, he stole, as it were, the
shift off the girl, who being, I suppose, broke and fami-
liariz'd to this humour, blush'd indeed, but less than I
did at the apparition of her, now standing stark-naked,
just as she came out of the hands of pure nature, with her
black hair loose and a-float down her dazzling white neck
and shoulders, whilst the deepen'd carnation of her cheeks
went off gradually into the hue of glaz'd snow: for such
     This girl could not be above eighteen: her face re-
gular and sweet-featur'd, her shape exquisite; nor could I
help envying her two ripe enchanting breasts, finely plump'd
out in flesh, but withal so round, so firm, that they sus-
tain'd themselves, in scorn of any stay: then their nipples,
pointing different ways, mark'd their pleasing separation;
beneath them lay the delicious tract of the belly, which
terminated in a parting or rift scarce discernible, that
modesty seem'd to retire downwards, and seek shelter be-
tween two plump fleshy thighs: the curling hair that over-
spread its delightful front, cloathed it with the richest
sable fur in the universe: in short, she was evidently a
subject for the painters to court her sitting to them for 
a pattern of female beauty, in all the true price and pomp
     The young Italian (still in his shirt) stood gazing
and transported at the sight of beauties that might have
fir'd a dying hermit; his eager eyes devour'd her, as she
shifted attitudes at his discretion: neither were his hands
excluded their share of the high feast, but wander'd, on 
the hunt of pleasure, over every part and inch of her body,
so qualified to afford the most exquisite sense of it.
     In the mean time, one could not help observing the 
swell of his shirt before, that bolster'd out, and shewed
the condition of things behind the curtain: but he soon
remov'd it, by slipping his shirt over his head; and now,
as to nakedness, they had nothing to reproach one another.
     The young gentleman, by Phoebe's guess, was about two
and twenty; tall and well limb'd.  His body was finely
form'd and of a most vigorous make, square-shoulder'd, and
broad-chested: his face was not remarkable in any way, but
for a nose inclining to the Roman, eyes large, black, and
sparkling, and a ruddiness in his cheeks that was the more
a grace, for his complexion was of the brownest, not of that
dusky dun colour which excludes the idea of freshness, but
of that clear, olive gloss which, glowing with life, dazzles
perhaps less than fairness, and yet pleases more, when it
pleases at all.  His hair, being too short to tie, fell no
lower than his neck, in short easy curls; and he had a few
sprigs about his paps, that garnish'd his chest in a style
of strength and manliness.  Then his grand movement, which
seem'd to rise out of a thicket of curling hair that spread
from the root all round thighs and belly up to the navel,
stood stiff and upright, but of a size to frighten me, by
sympathy, for the small tender part which was the object of
its fury, and which now lay expos'd to my fairest view; for
he had, immediately on stripping off his shirt, gently
push'd her down on the couch, which stood conveniently to
break her willing fall.  Her thighs were spread out to their
utmost extension, and discovered between them the mark of
the sex, the red-center'd cleft of flesh, whose lips, ver-
milioning inwards, exprest a small rubid line in sweet
miniature, such as Guido's touch of colouring could never
     Phoebe, at this gave me a gentle jog, to prepare me for
a whispered question: whether I thought my little maidenhead
was much less?  But my attention was too much engross'd, too
much enwrapp'd with all I saw, to be able to give her any
     By this time the young gentleman had changed her pos-
ture from lying breadth to length-wise on the couch: but her
thighs were still spread, and the mark lay fair for him, who
now kneeling between them, display'd to us a side-view of
that fierce erect machine of his, which threaten'd no less
than splitting the tender victim, who lay smiling at the up-
lifted stroke, nor seem'd to decline it.  He looked upon his 
weapon himself with some pleasure, and guiding it with his
hand to the inviting slit, drew aside the lips, and lodg'd 
it (after some thrusts, which Polly seem'd even to assist)
about half way; but there it stuck, I suppose from its grow-
ing thickness: he draws it again, and just wetting it with
spittle, re-enters, and with ease sheath'd it now up to the
hilt, at which Polly gave a deep sigh, which was quite
another tone than one of pain; he thrusts, she heaves, at
first gently, and in a regular cadence; but presently the
transport began to be too violent ot observe any order or
measure; their motions were too rapid, their kisses too
fierce and fervent for nature to support such fury long:
both seem'd to me out of themselves: their eyes darted
fires:  "Oh! . . . oh! . . . I can't bear it . . . It is
too much . . . I die . . . I am going . . ." were Polly's
expressions of extasy: his joys were more silent; but soon
broken murmurs, sighs heart-fetch'd, and at length a dis-
patching thrust, as if he would have forced himself up her
body, and then motionless languor of all his limbs, all 
shewed that the die-away moment was come upon him; which
she gave signs of joining with, by the wild throwing of her
hands about, closing her eyes, and giving a deep sob, in 
     When he had finish'd his stroke, and got from off her, 
she lay still without the least motion, breathless, as it
should seem, with pleasure.  He replaced her again breadth-
wise on the couch, unable to sit up, with her thighs open,
between which I could observe a kind of white liquid, like
froth, hanging about the outward lips of that recently 
opened wound, which now glowed with a deeper red.  Pre-
sently she gets up, and throwing her arms round him, seemed
far from undelighted with the trial he had put her to, to
judge at least by the fondness with which she ey'd and hung
     For my part, I will not pretend to describe what I
felt all over me during this scene; but from that instant,
adieu all fears of what man could do unto me; they were now
changed into such ardent desires, such ungovernable longings,
that I could have pull'd the first of that sex that should
present himself, by the sleeve, and offered him the bauble,
which I now imagined the loss of would be a gain I could not
     Phoebe, who had more experience, and to whom such
sights were not so new, could not however be unmoved at so
warm a scene; and drawing me away softly from the peep-hole,
for fear of being over-heard, guided me as near the door as
possible, all passive and obedient to her least signals.
     Here was no room either to sit or lie, but making me
stand with my back towards the door, she lifted up my
petticoats, and with her busy fingers fell to visit and 
explore that part of me where now the heat and irritations
were so violent that I was perfectly sick and ready to die
with desire; that the bare touch of her finger, in that
critical place, had the effect of a fire to a train, and
her hand instantly made her sensible to what a pitch I was
wound up, and melted by the sight she had thus procured me.
Satisfied then with her success in allaying a heat that
would have made me impatient of seeing the continuation of
the transactions between our amourous couple, she brought me
again to the crevice so favourable to our curiosity.
     We had certainly been but a few instants away from it,
and yet on our return we saw every thing in good forwardness
     The young foreigner was sitting down, fronting us, on
the couch, with Polly upon one knee, who had her arms round
his neck, whilst the extreme whiteness of her skin was not
undelightfully contrasted by the smooth glossy brown of her
     But who could count the fierce, unnumber's kisses given
and taken? in which I could of ten discover their exchanging
the velvet thrust, when both their mouths were double ton-
gued, and seemed to favour the mutual insertion with the
     In the mean time, his red-headed champion, that has so
lately fled the pit, quell'd and abash'd, was now recover'd
to the top of his condition, perk'd and crested up between
Polly's thighs, who was not wanting, on her part, to coax
and deep it in good humour, stroking it, with her head down,
and received even its velvet tip between the lips of not its
proper mouth: whether she did this out of any particular
pleasure, or whether it was to render it more glib and easy
of entrance, I could not tell; but it had such an effect,
that the young gentleman seem'd by  his eyes, that sparkled
with more excited lustre, and his inflamed countenance, to
receive increase of pleasure.  He got up, and taking Polly
in his arms, embraced her, and said something too softly for
me to hear, leading her withal to the foot of the couch, and
taking delight to slap her thighs and posteriors with that
stiff sinew of his, which hit them with a spring that he
gave it with his hand, and made them resound again, but hurt
her about as much as he meant to hurt her, for she seemed to
     But guess my surprise, when I saw the lazy young rogue
lie down on his back, and gently pull down Polly upon him,
who giving way to his humour, straddled, and with her hands
conducted her blind favourite to the right place; and fol-
lowing her impulse, ran directly upon the flaming point of
this weapon of pleasure, which she stak'd herself upon, up
pierc'd and infix'd to the extremest hair-breadth of it: 
thus she sat on him a few instants, enjoying and relishing
her situation, whilst he toyed with her provoking breasts.
Sometimes she would stoop to meet his kiss: but presently
the sting of pleasure spurr'd them up to fiercer action;
then began the storm of heaves, which, form the undermost 
combatant, were thrusts at the same time, he crossing his
hands over her, and drawing her home to him with a sweet
violence: the inverted strokes of anvil over hammer soon
brought on the critical period, in which all the signs of a
close conspiring extasy informed us of the point they were
     For me, I could bear to see no more; I was so overcome,
so inflamed at the second part of the same play, that, mad
to an intolerable degree, I hugg'd, I clasped Phoebe, as if
she had wherewithal to relieve me.  Pleased however with, and
pitying the taking she could feel me in, she drew me towards
the door, and opening it as softly as she could, we both got
off undiscover'd, and she reconducted me to my own room, 
where, unable to keep my legs, in the agitation I was in, I
instantly threw myself down on the bed, where I lay trans-
     Phoebe lay down by me, and ask'd me archly if, now that
I had seen the enemy, and fully considered him, I was still
afraid of him? or did I think I could venture to come to a 
close engagement with him?  To all which, not a word on my
side; I sigh'd, and could scarce breathe.  She takes hold of
my hand, and having roll'd up her own petticoats, forced it 
half strivingly towards those parts, where, now grown more
knowing, I miss'd the main object of my wishes; and finding
not even the shadow of what I wanted, where every thing was
so flat, or so hollow, in the vexation I was in at it, I 
should have withdrawn my hand but for fear of disobliging
her.  Abandoning it then entirely to her management, she
made use of it as she thought proper, to procure herself
rather the shadow than the substance of any pleasure.  For
my part, I now pin'd for more solid food, and promis'd
tacitly to myself that I would not be put off much longer
with this foolery from woman to woman, if Mrs. Brown did
not soon provide me with the essential specific.  In short,
I had all the air of not being able to wait the arrival of
my lord B . . . tho' he was now expected in a very few days:
nor did I wait for him, for love itself took charge of the
disposal of me, in spite of interest, or gross lust.
     It was now two days after the closet-scene, that I got
up about six in the morning, and leaving my bed-fellow fast
asleep, stole down, with no other thought than of taking a
little fresh air in a small garden, which our back-parlour
open'd into, and from which my confinement debarr'd me at
the times company came to the house; but now sleep and
     I open'd the parlour door, and well surpriz'd was I at
seeing, by the side of a fire half-our, a young gentleman in
the old lady's elbow chair, with his legs laid upon another,
fast asleep, and left there by his thoughtless companions,
who had drank him down, and then went off with every one his
mistress, whilst he stay'd behind by the courtesy of the old
matron, who would not disturb of turn him out in that con-
dition, at one in the morning; and beds, it is more than
probable, there were none to spare.  On the table still re-
main'd the punch bowl and glasses, strew's about in their
      But when I drew nearer, to view the sleeping one, 
heavens! what a sight!  No! no term of years, no turn of
fortune could ever erase the lightning-like impression
his form made on me . . . Yes! dearest object of my ear-
liest passion, I command for ever the remembrance of thy
first appearance to my ravish'd eyes . . . it calls thee
     Figure to yourself, Madam, a fair stripling, between
eighteen and nineteen, with his head reclin'd on one of the
sides of the chair, his hair in disorder'd curls, irregular-
ly shading a face on which all the roseate bloom of youth
and all the manly graces conspired to fix my eyes and heart.
Even the languor and paleness of his face, in which the
momentary triumph of the lily over the rose was owing to the
excesses of the night, gave an inexpressible sweetness to 
the finest features imaginable: his eyes, closed in sleep, 
displayed the meeting edges of their lids beautifully bor-
dered with long eyelashes; over which no pencil could have
described two more regular arches than those that grac'd his
forehead, which was high, prefectly white and smooth.  Then
a pair of vermilion lips, pouting and swelling to the touch,
as if a bee had freshly stung them, seem'd to challenge me
to get the gloves off this lovely sleeper, had not the mod-
esty and respect, which in both sexes are inseparable from
     But on seeing his shirt-collar unbutton'd, and a bosom
whiter than a drift of snow, the pleasure of considering it
could not bribe me to lengthen it, at the hazard of a health
that began to be my life's concern.  Love, that made me
timid, taught me to be tender too.  With a trembling hand I
took hold of one of his, and waking his as gently as possi-
ble, he started, and looking, at first a little wildly, said
with a voice that sent its harmonious sound to my heart: 
"Pray, child, what o'clock is it?"  I told him, and added
that he might catch cold if he slept longer with his breast
open in the cool of the morning air.  On this he thanked me
with a sweetness perfectly agreeing with that of his fea-
tures and eyes; the last now broad open, and eagerly sur-
veying me, carried the sprightly fires they sparkled with
     It seems that having drank too freely before he came
upon the rake with some of his young companions, he had put
himself out of a condition to go through all the weapons
with them, and crown the night with getting a mistress; so
that seeing me in a loose undress, he did not doubt but I
was one of the misses of the house, sent in to repair his
loss of time; but though he seiz'd that notion, and a very
obvious one it was, without hesitation, yet, whether my
figure made a more than ordinary impression on him, or
whether it was natural politeness, he address'd me in a
manner far from rude, tho' still on the foot of one of the
house pliers, come to amuse him; and giving me the first
kiss that I ever relish'd from man in my life, ask'd me it
I could favour him with my company, assuring me that he
would make it worth my while: but had not even new-born
love, that true refiner of lust, oppos'd so sudden a sur-
render, the fear of being surpriz'd by the house was a
     I told him then, in a tone set me by love itself, that
for reasons I had not time to explain to him, I could not 
stay with him, and might not even ever see him again: with
a sigh at these last words, which broke from the bottom of
my heart.  My conqueror, who, as he afterwards told me, had
been struck with my appearance, and lik'd me as much as he
could think of liking any one in my suppos'd way of life,
ask'd me briskly at once if I would be kept by him, and that
he would take a lodging for me directly, and relieve me from
any engagements he presum'd I might be under to the house.
Rash, sudden, undigested, and even dangerous as this offer
might be from a perfect stranger, and that stranger a giddy
boy, the prodigious love I was struck with for him had put a
charm into his voice there was no resisting, and blinded me
to every objection; I could, at that instant, have died for
him: think if I could resist an invitation to live with him!
Thus my heart, beating strong to the proposal, dictated my
answer, after scarce a minute's pause, that I would accept 
of his offer, and make my escape to him in what way he
pleased, and that I would be entirely at his disposal, let
it be good or bad.  I have often since wondered that so
great an easiness did not disgust him, or make me too cheap
in his eyes, but my fate had so appointed it, that in his
fears of the hazard of the town, he had been some time
looking out for a girl to take into keeping, and my person
happening to hit his fancy, it was by one of those miracles
reserved to love that we struck the bargain in the instant,
which we sealed by an exchange of kisses, that the hopes of
a more uninterrupted enjoyment engaged him to content him-
     Never, however, did dear youth carry in his person, 
more wherewith to justify the turning of a girl's head, and
making her set all consequences at defiance for the sake of
     For, besides all the perfections of manly beauty which
were assembled in his form, he had an air of neatness and 
gentility, a certain smartness in the carriage and port of
his head, that yet more distinguish'd him; his eyes were
sprightly and full of meaning; his looks had in them some-
thing at once sweet and commanding.  His complexion out-
bloom'd the lovely-colour'd rose, whilst its inimitable
tender vivid glow clearly sav'd from the reproach of want-
ing life, of raw and dough-like, which is commonly made to
     Our little plan was that I should get out about seven
the next morning (which I could readily promise, as I knew
where to get the key of the street-door), and he would wait
at the end of the street with a coach to convey me safe off;
after which, he would send, and clear any debt incurr'd by 
my stay at Mrs. Brown's, who, he only judged, in gross, 
might not care to part with one he thought so fit to draw
     I then just hinted to him not to mention in the house
his having seen such a person as me, for reasons I would
explain to him more at leisure.  And then, for fear of 
miscarrying, by being seen together, I tore myself from
him with a bleeding heart, and stole up softly to my room,
where I found Phoebe still fast asleep, and hurrying off my
few cloaths, lay down by her, with a mixture of joy and
anxiety that may be easier conceived than express'd.  
     The risks of Mrs. Brown's discovering my purpose, of
disappointments, misery, ruin, all vanish'd before this new-
kindl'd flame.  The seeing, the touching, the being, if but
for a night, with this idol of my fond virgin-heart, appeared
to me a happiness above the purchase of my liberty or life.
He might use me ill, let him! he was the master; happy, too
     To this purpose were the reflections of the whole day,
of which every minute seem'd to me a little eternity.  How
often did I visit the clock! nay, was tempted to advance 
the tedious hand, as if that would have advanc'd the time 
with it!  Had those of the house made the least observations
on me, they must have remark'd something extraordinary from
the discomposure I could not help betraying; especially when
at dinner mention was made of the charmingest youth having
been there, and stay'd breakfast.  "Oh! he was such a beauty!
. . . I should have died for him! . . . they would pull caps
for him! . . ." and the like fooleries, which, however, was
throwing oil on a fire I was sorely put to it to smother the
     The fluctuations of my mind, the whole day, produc'd
one good effect: which was, that, through mere fatigue, I
slept tolerably well till five in the morning, when I got up,
and having dress'd myself, waited, under the double tortures
of fear and impatience, for the appointed hour.  It came at 
last, the dear, critical, dangerous hour came; and now, sup-
ported only by the courage love lent me, I ventured, a tip-
toe, down-stairs, leaving my box behind, for fear of being
     I got to the street-door, the key whereof was always
laid on the chair by our bed-side, in trust with Phoebe, who
having not the least suspicion of my entertaining any design
to go from them (nor indeed had I but the day before), made
no reserve or concealment of it from me.  I open'd the door
with great ease; love, that embolden'd, protected me too:
and now, got safe into the street, I saw my new guardian-
angel waiting at a coach-door, ready open.  How I got to him
I know not: I suppose I flew; but I was in the coach in a
trice, and he by the side of me, with his arms clasp'd round
me, and giving me the kiss of welcome.  The coachman had his
     My eyes were instantly fill'd with tears, but tears of 
the most delicious delight; to find myself in the arms of 
that beauteous youth was a rapture that my little heart swam
in.  Past or future were equally out of the question with 
me.  The present was as much as all my powers of life were
sufficient to bear the transport of, without fainting.  Nor
were the most tender embraces, the most soothing expressions
wanting on his side, to assure me of his love, and of never
giving me cause to repent the bold step I had taken, in
throwing myself thus entirely upon his honour and generosity.
But, alas! this was no merit in me, for I was drove to it by
a passion too impetuous for me to resist, and I did what I
     In an instant, for time was now annihilated with me, we
landed at a public house in Chelsea, hosipitably commodious
for the reception of duet-parties of pleasure, where a break-
     An old jolly stager, who kept it, and understood life
perfectly well, breakfasted with us, and leering archly at
me, gave us both joy, and said we were well paired, i' faith!
that a great many gentlemen and ladies used his house, but he
had never seen a handsomer couple . . . he was sure I was a
fresh piece . . . I look'd so country, so innocent! well my
spouse was a lucky man! . . . all which common landlord's
cant not only pleas'd and sooth'd me, but help'd to divert
my confusion at being with my new sovereign, whom, now the
minute approach'd, I began to fear to be alone with: a
timidity which true love had a greater share in than even
     I wish'd, I doted, I could have died for him; and yet,
I know not how, or why, I dreaded the point which had been
the object of my fiercest wishes; my pulses beat fears,
amidst a flush of the warmest desires.  This struggle of the
passions, however, this conflict betwixt modesty and love-
sick longings, made me burst again into tears; which he took,
as he had done before, only for the remains of concern and
emotion at the suddenness of my change of condition, in com-
mitting myself to his care; and, in consequence of that idea,
did and said all that he thought would most comfort and re-
     After breakfast, Charles (the dear familiar name I must
take the liberty henceforward to distinguish my Adonis by),
with a smile full of meaning, took me gently by the hand, and
said:  "Come, my dear, I will show you a room that commands a
fine prospect over some gardens"; and without waiting for an
answer, in which he relieved me extremely, he led me up into
a chamber, airy and light-some, where all seeing of prospects
was out of the question, except that of a bed, which had all
     Charles had just slipp'd the bolt of the door, and run-
ning, caught me in his arms, and lifting me from the ground,
with his lips glew'd to mine, bore me, trembling, panting,
dying, with soft fears and tender wishes, to the bed; where
his impatience would not suffer him to undress me, more than
just unpinning my handkerchief and gown, and unlacing my
     My bosom was now bare, and rising in the warmest throbs,
presented to his sight and feeling the firm hard swell of a
pair of young breasts, such as may be imagin'd of a girl not
sixteen, fresh out of the country, and never before handled;
but even their pride, whiteness, fashion, pleasing resistance
to the touch, could not bribe his restless hands from roving;
but giving them the loose, my petticoats and shift were soon
taken up, and their stronger center of attraction laid open
to their tender invasion.  My fears, however, made me mechan-
ically close my thighs; but the very touch of his hand insin-
uated between them, disclosed them and opened a way for the
     In the mean time, I lay fairly exposed to the examina-
tion of his eyes and hands, quiet and unresisting; which 
confirm'd him the opinion he proceeded so cavalierly upon,
that I was no novice in these matters, since he had taken
me out of a common bawdy-house, nor had I said one thing to
prepossess him of my virginity; and if I had, he would 
sooner have believ'd that I took him for a cully that would
swallow such an improbability, than that I was still mis-
tress of that darling treasure, that hidden mine, so eagerly
sought after by the men, and which they never dig for, but
     Being now too high wound up to bear a delay, he un-
button'd, and drawing out the engine of love-assaults, drove
it currently, as at a ready-made breach . . . Then! then!
for the first time, did I feel that stiff horn-hard gristle,
battering against the tender part; but imagine to yourself
his surprize when he found, after several vigorous pushes
which hurt me extremely, that he made not the least im-
     I complain'd but tenderly complain'd that I could not
bear it . . . indeed he hurt me! . . . Still he thought no
more than that being so young, the largeness of his machine
(for few men could dispute size with him) made all the dif-
iculty; and that possible I had not been enjoy'd by any so
advantageously made in that part as himself: for still,
that my virgin flower was yet uncrop'd, never enter'd into
his head, and he would have thought it idling with time and
     He tries again, still no admittance, still no penetra-
tion; but he had hurt me yet more, whilst my extreme love 
made me bear extreme pain, almost without a groan.  At
length, after repeated fruitless trials, he lay down panting
by me, kiss'd my falling tears, and asked me tenderly what 
was the meaning of so much complaining? and if I had not
borne it better from others than I did from him? I answered,
with a simplicity fram'd to persuade, that he was the first
man that ever serv'd me so.  Truth is powerful, and it is
not always that we do not believe what we eagerly wish.
     Charles, already dispos'd by the evidence of his senses
to think my pretences to virginity not entirely apocryphal,
smothers me with kisses, begs me, in the name of love, to
have a little patience, and that he will be as tender of
     Alas! it was enough I knew his pleasure to submit joy-
fully to him, whatever pain I foresaw it would cost me.
     He now resumes his attempts in more form: first, he put
one of the pillows under me, to give the blank of his aim a
more favourable elevation, and another under my head, in
ease of it; then spreading my thighs, and placing himself
standing between them, made them rest upon his hips; apply-
ing then the point of his machine to the slit, into which he
sought entrance: it was so small, he could scarce assure
himself of its being rightly pointed.  He looks, he feels,
and satisfies himself: the driving forward with fury, its
prodigious stiffness, thus impacted, wedgelike, breaks the
union of those parts, and gain'd him just the insertion of
the tip of it, lip-deep; which being sensible of, he improv-
ed his advantage, and following well his stroke, in a
straight line, forcibly deepens his penetration; but put me
to such intolerable pain, from the separation of the sides
of that soft passage by a hard thick body, I could have
scream'd out; but, as I was unwilling to alarm the house, I
held in my breath, and cramm'd my petticoat, which was
turn'd up over my face, into my mouth, and bit it through
in the agony.  At length, the tender texture of that tract
giving way to such fierce tearing and rending, he pierc'd
something further into me: and now, outrageous and no longer
his own master, but borne headlong away by the fury and
over-mettle of that member, now exerting itself with a kind
of native rage, he breaks in, carries all before him, and
one violent merciless lunge sent it, imbrew'd, and reeking
with virgin blood, up to the very hilt in me . . . Then!
then all my resolution deserted me: I scream'd out, and
fainted away with the sharpness of the pain; and, as he told
me afterwards, on his drawing out, when emission was over
with him, my thighs were instantly all in a stream of blood
     When I recover'd my senses, I found myself undress'd,
and a-bed, in the arms of the sweet relenting murderer of my
virginity, who hung mourning tenderly over me, and holding
in his hand a cordial, which, coming from the still dear
author of so much pain, I could not refuse; my eyes, however,
moisten'd with tears, and languishingly turn'd upon him,
seemed to reproach him with his cruelty, and ask him if such
were the rewards of love.  But Charles, to whom I was now
infinitely endear'd by this complete triumph over a maiden-
head, where he so little expected to find one, in tenderness
to that pain which he had put me to, in procuring himself
the height of pleasure, smother'd his exultation, and em-
ploy'd himself with so much sweetness, so much warmth, to
sooth, to caress, and comfort me in my soft complainings,
which breath'd, indeed, more love than resentment, that I 
presently drown'd all sense of pain in the pleasure of seeing
him, of thinking that I belong'd to him: he who was now the
absolute disposer of my happiness, and, in one word, my fate.
     The sore was, however, too tender, the wound too bleed-
ing fresh, for Charles's good-nature to put my patience pre-
sently to another trial; but as I could not stir, or walk
across the room, he order'd the dinner to be brought to the
bed-side, where it could not be otherwise than my getting
down the wing of a fowl, and two or three glasses of wine,
since it was my ador'd youth who both serv'd, and urged them
on me, with that sweet irresistible authority with which love
     After dinner, and as everything but the wine was taken
away, Charles very impudently asks a leave, he might read the
grant of in my eyes, to come to bed to me, and accordingly
falls to undressing; which I could not see the progress of
     He is now in bed with me the first time, and in broad
day; but when thrusting up his own shirt and my shift, he 
laid his naked glowing body to mine . . . oh! insupportable
delight! oh! superhuman rapture! what pain could stand be-
fore a pleasure so transporting?  I felt no more the smart
of my wounds below; but, curling round him like the tendril
of a vine, as if I fear'd any part of him should be un-
touch'd or unpress'd by me, I return'd his strenuous em-
braces and kisses with a fervour and gust only known to true
     Yes, even at this time, when all the tyranny of the 
passions is fully over and my veins roll no longer but a 
cold tranquil stream, the remembrance of those passages
that most affected me in my youth, still cheers and re-
freshes me.  Let me proceed then.  My beauteous youth was
now glew'd to me in all the folds and twists that we could
make our bodies meet in; when, no longer able to rein in the
fierceness of refresh'd desires, he gives his steed the head
and gently insinuating his thighs between mine, stopping my
mouth with kisses of humid fire, makes a fresh irruption, 
and renewing his thrusts, pierces, tears, and forces his way
up the torn tender folds that yielded him admission with a
smart little less severe that when the breach was first made.
I stifled, however, my cries, and bore him with the passive
fortitude of a heroine; soon his thrusts, more and more fur-
ious, cheeks flush'd with a deeper scarlet, his eyes turn'd
up in the fervent fit, some dying sighs, and an agonizing
shudder, announced the approaches of that extatic pleasure,
I was yet in too much pain to come in for my share of it.
     Nor was it till after a few enjoyments had numb'd and
blunted the sense of the smart, and given me to feel the
titillating inspersion of balsamic sweets, drew from me the
delicious return, and brought down all my passion, that I
arrived at excess of pleasure through excess of pain.  But,
when successive engagements had broke and inur'd me, I began
to enter into the true unallay'd relish of that pleasure of
pleasures, when the warm gush darts through all the ravish'd
inwards; what floods of bliss! what melting transports! what
agonies of delight! too fierce, too mighty for nature to
sustain; well has she therefore, no doubt, provided the re-
lief of a delicious momentary dissolution, the approaches of
which are intimated by a dear delirium, a sweet thrill on the
point of emitting those liquid sweets, in which enjoyment
itself is drown'd, when one gives the languishing stretch-out,
     How often, when the rage and tumult of my senses had
subsided after the melting flow, have I, in a tender medi-
tation ask'd myself coolly the question, if it was in nature
for any of its creatures to be so happy as I was?  Or, what
were all fears of the consequence, put in the scale of one
night's enjoyment of any thing so transcendently the taste
of my eyes and heart, as that delicious, fond, matchless
     Thus we spent the whole afternoon till supper time in
a continued circle of love delights, kissing, turtle-billing,
toying, and all the rest of the feast.  At length, supper
was serv'd in, before which Charles had, for I do not know
what reason, slipt his cloaths on; and sitting down by the
bed-side, we made table and table-cloth of the bed and sheets,
whilst he suffer'd nobody to attend or serve but himself.  He
ate with a very good appetite, and seem'd charm'd to see me
eat.  For my part, I was so enchanted with my fortune, so
transported with the comparison of the delights I now swam
in, with the insipidity of all my past scenes of life, that
I thought them sufficiently cheap at even the price of my
ruin, or the risk of their not lasting.  The present pos-
session was all my little head could find room for.
     We lay together that night, when, after playing re-
peated prizes of pleasure, nature, overspent and satisfy'd,
gave us up to the arms of sleep: those of my dear youth en-
circled me, the consciousness of which made even that sleep
     Late in the morning I wak'd first; and observing my
lover slept profoundly, softly disengag'd myself from his
arms, scarcely daring to breathe for fear of shortening his
repose; my cap, my hair, my shift, were all in disorder from
the rufflings I had undergone; and I took this opportunity
to adjust and set them as well as I could: whilst, every now
and then, looking at the sleeping youth with inconceivable
fondness and delight, and reflecting on all the pain he had
put me to, tacitly own'd that the pleasure had overpaid me
     It was then broad day.  I was sitting up in the bed,
the cloaths of which were all tossed, or rolled off, by the
unquietness of our motions, from the sultry heat of the
weather; nor could I refuse myself a pleasure that solicited
me so irresistibly, as this fair occasion of feasting my
sight with all those treasures of youthful beauty I had en-
joy'd, and which lay now almost entirely naked, his shirt
being truss'd up in a perfect wisp, which the warmth of the 
room and season made me easy about the consequence of.  I
hung over him enamour'd indeed! and devoured all his naked
charms with only two eyes, when I could have wish'd them at
least a hundred, for the fuller enjoyment of the gaze.
     Oh! could I paint his figure as I see it now, still 
present to my transported imagination! a whole length of an
allperfect, manly beauty in full view.  Think of a face
without a fault, glowing with all the opening bloom and 
vernal freshness of an age in which beauty is of either sex,
and which the first down over his upper lip scarce began to
     The parting of the double ruby pout of his lips seem'd
to exhale an air sweeter and purer than what it drew in: ah!
what violence did it not cost me to refrain the so tempted
     Then a neck exquisitely turn'd, grac'd behind and on
the sides with his hair, playing freely in natural ringlets,
connected his head to a body of the most perfect form, and
of the most vigorous contexture, in which all the strength
of manhood was conceal'd and soften'd to appearance by the
delicacy of his complexion, the smoothness of his skin, and
     The platform of his snow-white bosom, that was laid out
in a manly proportion, presented, on the vermilion summit of
     Nor did his shirt hinder me from observing that symmetry
of his limbs, that exactness of shape, in the fall of it to-
wards the loins, where the waist ends and the rounding swell
of the hips commences; where the skin, sleek, smooth, and
dazzling white, burnishes on the stretch over firm, plump, 
ripe flesh, that crimp'd and ran into dimples at the least
pressure, or that the touch could not rest upon, but slid
over as on the surface of the most polished ivory.
     His thighs, finely fashioned, and with a florid glossy
roundness, gradually tapering away to the knees, seem'd
pillars worthy to support that beauteous frame; at the 
bottom of which I could not, without some remains of terror,
some tender emotions too, fix my eyes on that terrible mac-
hine, which had, not long before, with such fury broke into,
torn, and almost ruin'd those soft, tender parts of mine
that had not yet done smarting with the effects of its rage;
but behold it now! crest fall'n, reclining its half-capt
vermilion head over one of his thighs, quiet, pliant, and to
all appearance incapable of the mischiefs and cruelty it had
committed.  Then the beautiful growth of the hair, in short
and soft curls round its root, its whiteness, branch'd veins,
the supple softness of the shaft, as it lay foreshort'd,
roll'd and shrunk up into a squab thickness, languid, and
borne up from between his thighs by its globular appendage,
that wondrous treasure-bag of nature's sweets, which,
rivell'd round, and purs'd up in the only wrinkles that are
known to please, perfected the prospect, and all together
formed the most interesting moving picture in nature, and
surely infinitely superior to those nudities furnish'd by
]the painters, statuaries, or any art, which are purchas'd
at immense prices; whilst the sight of them in actual life
is scarce sovereignly tasted by any but the few whom nature
has endowed with a fire of imagination, warmly pointed by a
truth of judgment to the spring-head, the originals of
beauty, of nature's unequall'd composition, above all the
imitation of art, or the reach of wealth to pay their price.
     But every thing must have an end.  A motion made by 
this angelic youth, in the listlessness of going off sleep,
replac'd his shirt and the bed-cloaths in a posture that 
     I lay down then, and carrying my hands to that part of
me in which the objects just seen had begun to raise a 
mutiny that prevail'd over the smart of them, my fingers now
open'd themselves an easy passage; but long I had not time 
to consider the wide difference there, between the maid and
the now finish'd woman, before Charles wak'd, and turning
towards me, kindly enquir'd how I had rested? and, scarce
giving me time to answer, imprinted on my lips one of his
burning rapture-kisses, which darted a flame to my heart,
that from thence radiated to every part of me; and present-
ly, as if he had proudly meant revenge for the survey I had
smuggled of all his naked beauties, he spurns off the bed-
cloaths, and trussing up my shift as high as it would go,
took his turn to feast his eyes on all the gifts nature had
bestow'd on my person; his busy hands, too, rang'd intemper-
ately over every part of me.  The delicious austerity and
hardness of my yet unripe budding breasts, the whiteness
and firmness of my flesh, the freshness and regularity of my
features, the harmony of my limbs, all seem'd to confirm him
in his satisfaction with his bargain; but when curious to
explore the havoc he had made in the centre of his over-
fierce attack, he not only directed his hands there, but
with a pillow put under, placed me favourably for his wanton
purpose of inspection.  Then, who can express the fire his
eyes glisten'd, his hands glow'd with! whilst sighs of plea-
sure, and tender broken exclamations, were all the praises 
he could utter.  By this time his machine, stiffly risen at
me, gave me to see it in its highest state and bravery.  He
feels it himself, seems pleas'd at its condition, and, smil-
ing loves and graces, seizes one of my hands, and carries
it, with a gentle compulsion, to his pride of nature, and
     I, struggling faintly, could not help feeling what I 
could not grasp, a column of the whitest ivory, beautifully
streak'd with blue veins, and carrying, fully uncapt, a
head of the liveliest vermilion: no horn could be harder or
stiffer; yet no velvet more smooth or delicious to the touch.
Presently he guided my hand lower, to that part in which
nature and pleasure keep their stores in concert, so aptly
fasten'd and hung on to the root of their first instrument
and minister, that not improperly he might be styl'd their
purse-bearer too: there he made me feel distinctly, through
their soft cover, the contents, a pair of roundish balls,
that seem'd to play within, and elude all pressure but the
     But now this visit of my soft warm hand in those so
sensible parts had put every thing into such ungovernable
fury that, disdaining all further preluding, and taking ad-
vantage of my commodious posture, he made the storm fall 
where I scarce patiently expected, and where he was sure to
lay it: presently, then, I felt the stiff insertion between
the yielding, divided lips of the wound, now open for life;
where the narrowness no longer put me to intolerable pain,
and afforded my lover no more difficulty than what height-
en'd his pleasure, in the strict embrace of that tender,
warm sheath, round the instrument it was so delicately ad-
justed to, and which, now cased home, so gorged me with
pleasure that it perfectly suffocated me and took away my
breath; then the killing thrusts! the unnumber'd kisses!
every one of which was a joy inexpressible; and that joy
lost in a crowd of yet greater blisses!  But this was a
disorder too violent in nature to last long: the vessels,
so stirr'd and intensely heated, soon boil'd over, and for
that time put out the fire; meanwhile all this dalliance
and disport had so far consum'd the morning, that it became
a kind of necessity to lay breakfast and dinner into one.
     In our calmer intervals Charles gave the following
account of himself, every word of which was true.  He was
the only son of a father who, having a small post in the
revenue, rather over-liv'd his income, and had given this
young gentleman a very slender education: no profession had
he bred him up to, but design'd to provide for him in the
army, by purchasing him an ensign's commission, that is to
say, provided he could raise the money, or procure it by
interest, either of which clauses was rather to be wish'd
than hoped for by him.  On no better a plan, however, had
this improvident father suffer'd this youth, a youth of
great promise, to run up to the age of manhood, or near it
at least, in next to idleness; and had, besides, taken no
sort of pains to give him even the common premonitions
against the vices of the town, and the dangers of all sorts,
which wait the unexperienc'd and unwary in it.  He liv'd at
home, and at discretion, with his father, who himself kept a
mistress; and for the rest, provided Charles did not ask him
for money, he was indolently kind to him: he might lie out
when he pleas'd; any excuse would serve, and even his repri-
mands were so slight that they carried with them rather an
air of connivance at the fault than any serious control or
constraint.  But, to supply his calls for money, Charles,
whose mother was dead, had, by her side, a grandmother who
doted upon him.  She had a considerable annuity to live on,
and very regularly parted with every shilling she could spare
to this darling of hers, to the no little heart-burn of his
father; who was vex'd, not that she by this means fed his
son's extravagance, but that she preferr'd Charles to him-
self; and we shall too soon see what a fatal turn such a
mercenary jealousy could operate in the breast of a father.
     Charles was, however, by the means of his grand-
mother's lavish fondness, very sufficiently enabled to keep
a mistress so easily contented as my love made me; and my
good fortune, for such I must ever call it, threw me in his
way, in the manner above related, just as he was on the
     As to temper, the even sweetness of it made him seem
born for domestic happiness: tender, naturally polite, and
gentle-manner'd; it could never be his fault if ever jars
or animosities ruffled a calm he was so qualified in every
way to maintain or restore.  Without those great or shining
qualities that constitute a genius, or are fit to make a
noise in the world, he had all those humble ones that com-
pose the softer social merit: plain common sense, set off
with every grace of modesty and good nature, made him, if 
not admir'd, what is much happier, universally belov'd and
esteem'd.  But, as nothing but the beauties of his person
had at first attracted my regard and fix'd my passion,
neither was I then a judge of that internal merit, which I
had afterward full occasion to discover, and which perhaps,
in that season of giddiness and levity, would have touch'd
my heart very little, had it been lodg'd in a person less
the delight of my eyes and idol of my senses.  But to re-
     After dinner, which we ate a-bed in a most voluptuous
disorder, Charles got up, and taking a passionate leave of
me for a few hours, he went to town where, concerting mat-
ters with a young sharp lawyer, they went together to my 
late venerable mistress's, from whence I had, but the day
before, made my elopement, and with whom he was determin'd
to settle accounts in a manner that should cut off all after
     Accordingly they went; but on the way, the Templar,
his friend, on thinking over Charles's information, saw
reason to give their visit another turn, and, instead of 
     On being let in, the girls of the house flock'd round
Charles, whom they knew, and from the earliness of my
escape, and their perfect ignorance of his ever having so
much as seen me, not having the least suspicion of his
being accessory to my flight, they were, in their way,
making up to him; and as to his companion, they took him
probably for a fresh cully.  But the Templar soon check'd
their forwardness, by enquiring for the old lady, with whom,
he said, with a grave judge-like countenance, that he had
     Madam was immediately sent down for, and the ladies
being desir'd to clear the room, the lawyer ask'd her,
severely, if she did know, or had not decoy'd, under pre-
tence of hiring as a servant, a young girl, just come out
of the country, called FRANCES or FANNY HILL, describing
me withal as particularly as he could from Charles's des-
     It is peculiar to vice to tremble at the enquiries of
justice; and Mrs. Brown, whose conscience was not entirely
clear upon my account, as knowing as she was of the town, 
as hackney's as she was in bluffing through all the dangers
of her vocation, could not help being alarm'd at the ques-
tion, especially when he went on to talk of a Justice of
peace, Newgate, the Old Bailey, indictments for keeping a
disorderly house, pillory, carting, and the whole process 
of that nature.  She, who, it is likely, imagin'd I had 
lodg'd an information against her house, look'd extremely
blank, and began to make a thousand protestations and
excuses.  However, to abridge, they brought away trium-
phantly my box of things, which, had she not been under an
awe, she might have disputed with them; and not only that;
but a clearance and discharge of any demands on the house,
at the expense of no more than a bowl of arrack-punch, the
treat of which, together with the choice of the house con-
veniences, was offer'd and not accepted.  Charles all the
time acted the chance-companion of the lawyer, who had
brought him there, as he knew the house, and appear'd in 
no wise interested in the issue; but he had the collateral
pleasure of hearing all that I had told him verified, so
far as the bawd's fears would give her leave to enter into
my history, which, if one may guess by the composition she
     Phoebe, my kind tutoress Phoebe, was at that time gone
out, perhaps in search of me, or their cook'd-up story had
     This negotiation had, however, taken up some time,
which would have appear'd much longer to me, left as I was,
in a strange house, if the landlady, a motherly sort of a
woman, to whom Charles had liberally recommended me, had
not come up and borne me company.  We drank tea, and her
chat help'd to pass away the time very agreeably, since he
was our theme; but as the evening deepened, and the hour
set for his return was elaps'd, I could not dispel the
gloom of impatience and tender fears which gathered upon
me, and which our timid sex are apt to feel in proportion
     Long, however, I did not suffer: the sight of him
over-paid me; and the soft reproach I had prepar'd for him
     I was still a-bed, yet unable to use my legs otherwise
than awkwardly, and Charles flew to me, catched me in his 
arms, rais'd and extending mine to meet his dear embrace,
and gives me an account, interrupted by many a sweet paren-
     I could not help laughing at the fright the old woman
had been put into, which my ignorance, and indeed my want
of innocence, had far from prepar'd me for bespeaking.  She
had, it seems, apprehended that I fled for shelter to some
relation I had recollected in town, on my dislike of their
ways and proceeding towards me, and that this application
came from thence; for, as Charles had rightly judg'd not
one neighbour had, at that still hour, seen the circum-
stance of my escape into the coach, or, at least, notic'd
him; neither had any in the house the least hint or clue of
suspicion of my having spoke to him, much less of my having
clapt up such a sudden bargain with a perfect stranger:
thus the greatest improbability is not always what we 
     We supped with all the gaiety of two young giddy crea-
tures at the top of their desires; and as I had most joy-
fully given up to Charles the whole charge of my future
happiness, I thought of nothing beyond the exquisite plea-
     He came to bed in due time; and this second night,
the pain being pretty well over, I tasted, in full draughts,
all the transports of perfect enjoyment: I swam, I bathed in 
bliss, till both fell fast asleep, through the natural con-
sequences of satisfied desires, and appeas'd flames; nor did
     Thus, making the most of love and life, did we stay in 
this lodging in Chelsea about ten days; in which time Charles
took care to give his excursions from home a favourable gloss,
and to keep his footing with his fond indulgent grandmother,
from whom he drew constant and sufficient supplies for the
charge I was to him, and which was very trifling, in compari-
sion with his former less regular course of pleasures.
     Charles remov'd me then to a private ready furnish'd
lodging in D . . . street, St. James's, where he paid half
a guinea a week for two rooms and a closet on the second 
floor, which he had been some time looking out for, and was
more convenient for the frequency of his visits than where
he had at first plac'd me, in a house which I cannot say but
I left with regret, as it was infinitely endear'd to me by
the first possession of my Charles, and the circumstance of
losing, there, that jewel which can never be twice lost.
The landlord, however, had no reason to complain of any
thing, but of a procedure in Charles too liberal not to make
     Arrived at our new lodgings, I remember I thought them
extremely fine, though ordinary enough, even at that price;
but, had it been a dungeon that Charles had brought me to,
his presence would have made it a little Versailles.
     The landlady, Mrs. Jones, waited on us to our apart-
ment, and with great volubility of tongue explain'd to us
all its conveniences--that her own maid should wait on us
. . . that the best of quality had lodg'd at her house . . .
that her first floor was let to a foreign secretary of an
embassy, and his lady . . . that I looked like a very good-
natur'd lady. . . .  At the word lady, I blush'd out of
flatter'd vanity: this was too strong for a girl of my con-
dition; for though Charles had had the precaution of dressing
me in a less tawdry flaunting style than were the cloaths I
escap'd to him in, and of passing me for his wife, that he
had secretly married, and kept private (the old story) on
account of his friends, I dare swear this appear'd extremely
apocryphal to a woman who knew the town so well as she did;
but that was the least of her concern.  It was impossible to
be less scruple-ridden than she was; and the advantage of
letting her rooms being her sole object, the truth itself
would have far from scandaliz'd her, or broke her bargain.
     A sketch of her picture, and personal history, will dis-
pose you to account for the part she is to act in my concerns.
     She was about forty-six years old, tall, meagre, red-
hair'd, with one of those trivial ordinary faces you meet
with everywhere, and go about unheeded and unmentioned.  In
her youth she had been kept by a gentleman who, dying, left
her forty pounds a year during her life, in consideration of
a daughter he had by her; which daughter, at the age of
seven-teen, she sold, for not a very considerable sum nei-
ther, to a gentleman who was going on Envoy abroad, and took
his purchase with him, where he us'd her with the utmost
tenderness, and it is thought, was secretly married to her:
but had constantly made a point of her not keeping up the
least correspondence with a mother base enough to make a
market of her own flesh and blood.  However, as she had no
nature, nor, indeed, any passion but that of money, this
gave her no further uneasiness, than, as she thereby lost a
handle of squeezing presents, or other after-advantages, out
of the bargain.  Indifferent then, by nature of constitution,
to every other pleasure but that of increasing the lump by
any means whatever, she commenc'd a kind of private procur-
ess, for which she was not amiss fitted, by her grave decent
appearance, and sometimes did a job in the match-making way;
in short, there was nothing that appear'd to her under the
shape of gain that she would not have undertaken.  She knew
most of the ways of the town, having not only herself been
upon, but kept up constant intelligences in it, dealing, be-
sides her practice in promoting a harmony between the two
sexes, in private pawn-broking and other profitable secrets.
She rented the house she liv'd in, and made the most of it
by letting it out in lodgings; though she was worth, at
least, near three or four thousand pounds, she would not
allow herself even the necessaries of life, and pinn'd her
subsistence entirely on what she could squeeze out of her
     When she saw such a young pair come under her roof,
her immediate notions, doubtless, were how she should make
the most money of us, by every means that money might be
made, and which, she rightly judged, our situation and
     In this hopeful sanctuary, and under the clutches of 
this harpy, did we pitch our residence.  It will not be
mighty material to you, or very pleasant to me, to enter
into a detail of all the petty cut-throat ways and means
with which she used to fleece us; all which Charles indol-
ently chose to bear with, rather than take the trouble of
removing, the difference of expense being scarce attended
to by a young gentleman who had no idea of stint, or even
of economy, and a raw country girl who knew nothing of the
     Here, however, under the wings of my sovereignly
belov'd, did I flow the most delicious hours of my life;
my Charles I had, and, in him, everything my fond heart
could wish or desire.  He carried me to plays, operas,
masquerades, and every diversion of the town; all of which
pleas'd me indeed, but pleas'd me infinitely the more for
his being with me, and explaining everything to me, and 
enjoying, perhaps, the natural impressions of surprize and
admiration, which such sights, at the first, never fail to
excite in a country girl, new to the delights of them; but
to me, they sensibly prov'd the power and full dominion of
the sole passion of my heart over me, a passion in which 
soul and body were concentre'd, and left me no room for any
     As to the men I saw at those places, or at any other,
they suffer'd so much in the comparison my eyes made of
them with my all-perfect Adonis, that I had not the infidel-
ity even of one wandering thought to reproach myself with 
upon his account.  He was the universe to me, and all that
     My love, in fine, was so excessive, that it arriv'd at
annihilating every suggestion or kindling spark of jealousy;
for, one idea only tending that way, gave me such exquisite
torment that my self-love, and dread of worse than death,
made me for ever renounce and defy it: nor had I, indeed,
occasion; for, were I to enter here on the recital of sev-
eral instances wherein Charles sacrific'd to me women of
greater importance than I dare hint (which, considering his
form, was no such wonder), I might, indeed, give you full
proof of his unshaken constancy to me; but would not you
accuse me of warming up again a feast that my vanity ought
     In our cessations from active pleasure, Charles fram'd
himself one, in instructing me, as far as his own lights
reach'd, in a great many points of life that I was, in con-
sequence of my no-education, perfectly ignorant of: nor did
I suffer one word to fall in vain from the mouth of my love-
ly teacher:  I hung on every syllable he utter'd, and re-
ceiv'd as oracles, all he said; whilst kisses were all the
interruption I could not refuse myself the pleasure of ad-
mitting, from lips that breath'd more than Arabian sweetness.
     I was in a little time enabled, by the progress I had
made, to prove the deep regard I had paid to all that he
had said to me: repeating it to him almost word for word;
and to shew that I was not entirely the parrot, but that I
reflected upon, that I enter'd into it, I join'd my own
     My country accent, and the rusticity of my gait, man-
ners, and deportment, began now sensibly to wear off, so
quick was my observation, and so efficacious my desire of
     As to money, though he brought me constantly all he
receiv'd, it was with difficulty he even got me to give it
room in my bureau; and what clothes I had, he could prevail
on me to accept of on no other foot than that of pleasing
him by the greater neatness in my dress, beyond which I had
no ambition.  I could have made a pleasure of the greatest
toil, and worked my fingers to the bone, with joy, to have
supported him: guess, then, if I could harbour any idea of
being burdensome to him, and this disinterested turn in me
was so unaffected, so much the dictate of my heart, that
Charles could not but feel it: and if he did not love me as
I did him (which was the constant and only matter of sweet
contention between us), he manag'd so, at least, as to give
me the satisfaction of believing it impossible for man to 
be more tender, more true, more faithful than he was.
     Our landlady, Mrs. Jones, came frequently up to my
apartment, from whence I never stirr'd on any pretext with-
out Charles; nor was it long before she worm'd out, without
much art, the secret of our having cheated the church of a
ceremony, and, in course, of the terms we liv'd together
upon; a circumstance which far from displeas'd her, con-
sidering the designs she had upon me, and which, alas! she
will, too soon, have room to carry into execution.  But in
the mean time, her own experience of life let her see that
any attempt, however indirect or disguis'd to divert or
break, at least presently, so strong a cement of hearts as
ours was, could only end in losing two lodgers, of whom
she made very competent advantages, if either of us came 
to smoke her commission; for a commission she had from one
of her customers, either to debauch, or get me away from
     But the barbarity of my fate soon sav'd her the task
of disuniting us.  I had now been eleven months with this
life of my life, which had passed in one continu'd rapid
stream of delight: but nothing so violent was ever made to
last.  I was about three months gone with child by him, a
circumstance which would have added to his tenderness had
he ever left me room to believe it could receive an addi-
tion, when the mortal, the unexpected blow of separation
fell upon us.  I shall gallop post over the particulars,
which I shudder yet to think of, and cannot to this instant
reconcile myself how, or by what means, I could out-live it.
     Two life-long days had I linger'd through without
hearing from him, I who breath'd, who existed but in him,
and had never yet seen twenty-four hours pass without seeing
or hearing from him.  The third day my impatience was so
strong, my alarms had been so severe, that I perfectly 
sicken'd with them; and being unable to support the shock
longer, I sunk upon the bed and ringing for Mrs. Jones, who
had far from comforted me under my anxieties, she came up.
I had scarce breath and spirit enough to find words to beg
of her, if she would save my life, to fall upon some means
of finding out, instantly, what was become of its only prop
and comfort.  She pity'd me in a way that rather sharpen'd
my affliction than suspended it, and went out upon this
     Far she had not to go: Charles's father lived but at 
an easy distance, in one of the streets that run into Covent
Garden.  There she went into a publick house, and from
thence sent for a maid-servant, whose name I had given her,
     The maid readily came, and as readily, when Mrs. Jones
enquir'd of her what was become of Mr. Charles, or whether
he was gone out of town, acquainted her with the disposal of
her master's son, which, the very day after, was no secret 
to the servants.  Such sure measures had he taken, for the 
most cruel punishment of his child for having more interest
with his grandmother than he had, though he made use of a
pretense, plausible enough, to get rid of him in this secret
and abrupt manner, for fear her fondness should have inter-
pos'd a bar to his leaving England, and proceeding on a
voyage he had concerted for him; which pretext was, that it
was indispensably necessary to secure a considerable inheri-
tance that devolv'd to him by the death of a rich merchant
(his own brother) at one of the factories in the South-Seas,
of which he had lately receiv'd advice, together with a copy
     In consequence of which resolution to send away his son,
he had, unknown to him, made the necessary preparations for
fitting him out, struck a bargain with the captain of a ship,
whose punctual execution of his orders he had secured, by his
interest with his principal owner and patron; and, in short,
concerted his measures so secretly and effectually that whilst
his son thought he was going down the river for a few hours,
he was stopt on board of a ship, debar'd from writing, and
     Thus was the idol of my soul torn from me, and forc'd on
a long voyage, without taking of one friend, or receiving one
line of comfort, except a dry explanation and instructions,
from his father, how to proceed when he should arrive at his
destin'd port, enclosing, withal, some letters of recommenda-
tion to a factor there: all these particulars I did not learn
     The maid, at the same time, added that she was sure this
usage of her sweet young master would be the death of his
grand-mama, as indeed it prov'd true; for the old lady, on
hearing it, did not survive the news a whole month; and as
her fortune consisted in an annuity, out of which she had 
laid up no reserves, she left nothing worth mentioning to her
so fatally envied darling, but absolutely refus'd to see his
     When Mrs. Jones return'd and I observ'd her looks, they
seem'd so unconcern'd, and even near to pleas'd, that I half
flatter'd myself she was going to set my tortur'd heart at
ease by bringing me good news; but this, indeed, was a cruel
delusion of hope: the barbarian, with all the coolness imag-
inable, stab'd me to the heart, in telling me, succinctly,
that he was sent away at least on a four years' voyage (here
she stretch'd maliciously), and that I could not expect, in
reason, ever to see him again: and all this with such pre-
nant circumstances that I could not help giving them credit,
     She had hardly finish'd her report before I fainted 
away and after several successive fits, all the while wild
and senseless, I miscarried of the dear pledge of my
Charles's love: but the wretched never die when it is
fittest they should die, and women are hard-liv'd to a
     The cruel and interested care taken to recover me sav'd 
an odious life: which, instead of the happiness and joys it
had overflow'd in, all of a sudden presented no view before
me of any thing but the depth of misery, horror, and the 
     Thus I lay six weeks, in the struggles of youth and
constitution, against the friendly efforts of death, which I
constantly invoked to my relief and deliverance, but which
proving too weak for my wish, I recovered at length, tho'
into a state of stupefaction and despair that threatened me
     Time, however, that great comforter in ordinary, began
to assuage the violence of my sufferings, and to numb my 
feeling of them.  My health return'd to me, though I still 
retain'd an air of grief, dejection, and languor, which
taking off the ruddiness of my country complexion, render'd
     The landlady had all this while officiously provided,
and taken care that I wanted for nothing: and as soon as she
saw me retriev'd into a condition of answering her purpose,
one day, after we had dined together, she congratulated me
on my recovery, the merit of which she took entirely to her-
self, and all this by way of introduction to a most terrible
and scurvy epilogue:  "You are now," says she,  "Miss Fanny,
tolerably well, and you are very welcome to stay in the lodg-
ings as long as you please; you see I have ask'd you for
nothing this long time, but truly I have a call to make up a
sum of money, which must be answer'd."  And, with that, pre-
sents me with a bill of arrears for rent, diet, apothecary's
charges, nurse, etc., sum total twenty-three pounds, seven-
teen and six-pence: towards discharging of which, I had not
in the world (which she well knew) more than seven guineas,
left by chance, of my dear Charles's common stock with me.
At the same time, she desir'd me to tell her what course I
would take for payment.  I burst out into a flood of tears
and told her my condition; adding that I would sell what few
cloaths I had, and that, for the rest, I would pay her as
soon as possible.  But my distress, being favourable to her
     She told me, very coolly, that "she was indeed sorry for
my misfortunes, but that she must do herself justice, though
it would go to the very heart of her to send such a tender
young creature to prison . . ."  At the word "prison!" every
drop of my blood chill'd, and my fright acted so strongly 
upon me, that, turning as pale and faint as a criminal at
the first sight of his place of execution, I was on the
point of swooning.  My landlady, who wanted only to terrify
me to a certain point, and not to throw me into a state of
body inconsistent with her designs upon it, began to soothe
me again, and told me, in a tone compos'd to more pity and
gentleness, that it would be my own fault, if she was forc'd
to proceed to such extremities; but she believ'd there was
a friend to be found in the world who would make up matters
to both our satisfactions, and that she would bring him to
drink tea with us that very afternoon, when she hoped we 
would come to a right understanding in our affairs.  To all
this, not a word of answer; I sat mute, confounded, terrify'd.
     Mrs. Jones however, judging rightly that it was time to
strike while the impressions were so strong upon me, left me
to my self and to all the terrors of an imagination, wounded
to death by the idea of going to a prison, and, from a prin-
ciple of self-preservation, snatching at every glimpse of
     In this situation I sat near half an hour, swallow'd up
in grief and despair, when my landlady came in, and obser-
ving a death-like dejection in my countenance and still in
pursuance of her plan, put on a false pity, and bidding me
be of a good heart:  Things, she said, would not be so bad
as I imagined if I would be but my own friend; and closed
with telling me she had brought a very honourable gentleman
to drink tea with me, who would give me the best advice how
to get rid of all my troubles.  Upon which, without waiting
for a reply, she goes out, and returns with this very hon-
ourable gentleman, whose very honourable procuress she had
     The gentleman, on his entering the room, made me a very
civil bow, which I had scarce strength, or presence of mind
enough to return a curtsy to; when the landlady, taking upon
her to do all the honours of the first interview (for I had
never, that I remember'd, seen the gentleman before), sets a
chair for him, and another for herself.  All this while not
a word on either side; a stupid stare was all the face I 
     The tea was made, and the landlady, unwilling, I sup-
pose, to lose any time, observing my silence and shyness
before this entire stranger:  "Come, Miss Fanny," says she,
in a coarse familiar style, and tone of authority, "hold up
your head, child, and do not let sorrow spoil that pretty
face of yours.  What! sorrows are only for a time; come, be
free, here is a worthy gentleman who has heard of your mis-
fortunes and is willing to serve you; you must be better
acquainted with him; do not you now stand upon your punc-
tilio's, and this and that, but make your market while you
     At this so delicate and eloquent harangue, the gentle-
man, who saw I look'd frighted and amaz'd, and indeed, in-
capable of answering, took her up for breaking things in so
abrupt a manner, as rather to shock than incline me to an
acceptance of the good he intended me; then, addressing
himself to me, told me he was perfectly acquainted with my
whole story and every circumstance of my distress, which he
own'd was a cruel plunge for one of my youth and beauty to
fall into; that he had long taken a liking to my person,
for which he appeal'd to Mrs. Jones, there present, but
finding me so absolutely engag'd to another, he had lost all
hopes of succeeding till he had heard the sudden reverse of
fortune that had happen'd to me, on which he had given par-
ticular orders to my landlady to see that I should want for
nothing; and that, had he not been forc'd abroad to The
Hague, on affairs he could not refuse himself to, he would
himself have attended me during my sickness; that on his
return, which was but the day before, he had, on learning
my recovery, desir'd my landlady's good offices to introduce
him to me, and was as angry, at least, as I was shock'd, at
the manner in which she had conducted herself towards ob-
taining him that happiness; but, that to shew me how much he
disown'd her procedure, and how far he was from taking any
ungenerous advantage of my situation, and from exacting any
security for my gratitude, he would before my face, that 
instant, discharge my debt entirely to my landlady and give
me her receipt in full; after which I should be at liberty
either to reject or grant his suit, as he was much above 
     Whilst he was exposing his sentiments to me, I ventur'd
just to look up to him, and observed his figure, which was 
that of a very sightly gentleman, well made, about forty,
drest in a suit of plain cloaths, with a large diamond ring 
on one of his fingers, the lustre of which play'd in my eyes
as he wav'd his hand in talking, and rais'd my notions of his
importance.  In short, he might pass for what is commonly
call'd a comely black man, with an air of distinction natural
     To all his speeches, however, I answer'd only in tears
that flow'd plentifully to my relief, and choking up my
voice, excus'd me from speaking, very luckily, for I should
     The sight, however, mov'd him, as he afterwards told me,
irresistibly, and by way of giving me some reason to be less
powerfully afflicted, he drew out his purse, and calling for
pen and ink, which the landlady was prepar'd for, paid her
every farthing of her demand, independent of a liberal gra-
tification which was to follow unknown to me; and taking a 
receipt in full, very tenderly forc'd me to secure it, by
guiding my hand, which he had thrust it into, so as to make
     Still I continued in a state of stupidity, or melan-
choly despair, as my spirits could not yet recover from the
violent shocks they had receiv'd; and the accommodating
landlady had actually left the room, and me alone with this
strange gentleman, before I observ'd it, and then I observ'd
it without alarm, for I was now lifeless and indifferent to
     The gentleman, however, no novice in affairs of this 
sort, drew near me; and under the pretence of comforting me,
first with his handkerchief dried my tears as they ran down
my cheeks: presently he ventur'd to kiss me: on my part,
neither resistance nor compliance.  I sat stock-still; and
now looking on myself as bought by the payment that had been
transacted before me, I did not care what became of my
wretched body: and, wanting life, spirits, or courage to 
oppose the least struggle, even that of the modesty of my 
sex, I suffer'd, tamely, whatever the gentleman pleased; who
proceeding insensibly from freedom to freedom, insinuated
his hand between my handkerchief and bosom, which he handled
at discretion: finding thus no repulse, and that every thing
favour'd, beyond expectation, the completion of his desires,
he took me in his arms, and bore me, without life or motion,
to the bed, on which laying me gently down, and having me at
what advantage he pleas'd, I did not so much as know what he
was about, till recovering from a trance of lifeless insen-
sibility, I found him buried in me, whilst I lay passive and
innocent of the least sensation of pleasure: a death-cold
corpse could scarce have less life or sense in it.  As soon
as he had thus pacified a passion which had too little re-
spected the condition I was in, he got off, and after re-
composing the disorder of my cloaths, employ'd himself with
the utmost tenderness to calm the transports of remorse and
madness at myself with which I was seized, too late, I con-
fess, for having suffer'd on that bed the embraces of an
utter stranger.  I tore my hair, wrung my hands, and beat
my breast like a mad-woman.  But when my new master, for in
that light I then view'd him, applied himself to appease me,
as my whole rage was levell'd at myself, no part of which I
thought myself permitted to aim at him, I begged of him,
with more submission than anger, to leave me alone that I
might, at least, enjoy my affliction in quiet.  This he
positively refused, for fear, as he pretended, I should do
     Violent passions seldom last long, and those of women
least of any.  A dead still calm succeeded this storm, which
     Had any one, but a few instants before, told me that I
should have ever known any man but Charles, I would have 
spit in his face; or had I been offer'd infinitely a greater
sum of money than that I saw paid for me, I had spurn'd the
proposal in cold blood.  But our virtues and our vices
depend too much on our circumstances; unexpectedly beset as
I was, betray'd by a mind weakened by a long severe afflic-
tion, and stunn'd with the terrors of a jail, my defeat
will appear the more excusable, since I certainly was not
present at, or a party in any sense, to it.  However, as the
first enjoyment is decisive, and he was now over the bar, I
thought I had no longer a right to refuse the caresses of
one that had got that advantage over me, no matter how ob-
tain'd; conforming myself then to this maxim, I consider'd
myself as so much in his power that I endur'd his kisses and
embraces without affecting struggles or anger; not that they,
as yet, gave me any pleasure, or prevail'd over the aversion
of my soul to give myself up to any sensation of that sort;
what I suffer'd, I suffer'd out of a kind of gratitude, and
     He was, however, so regardful as not to attempt the re-
newal of those extremities which had thrown me, just before,
into such violent agitations; but, now secure of possession,
contented himself with bringing me to temper by degrees, and
waiting at the hand of time for those fruits of generosity
and courtship which he since often reproach'd himself with
having gather'd much too green, when, yielding to the invi-
tations of my inability to resist him, and overborne by 
desires, he had wreak'd his passion on a mere lifeless, 
spiritless body dead to all purposes of joy, since, taking
none, it ought to be suppos'd incapable of giving any.  This
is, however, certain; my heart never thoroughly forgave him
the manner in which I had fallen to him, although, in point
of interest, I had reason to be pleas'd that he found, in my
person, wherewithal to keep him from leaving me as easily as 
     The evening was, in the mean time, so far advanc'd, that
the maid came in to lay the cloth for supper, when I under-
stood, with joy, that my landlady, whose sight was present
     Presently a neat and elegant supper was introduc'd, and
a bottle of Burgundy, with the other necessaries, were set on
     The maid quitting the room, the gentleman insisted, with
a tender warmth, that I should sit up in the elbow chair by
the fire, and see him eat if I could not be prevailed on to
eat myself.  I obey'd with a heart full of affliction, at the
comparison it made between those delicious tete-a-tetes with
my ever dear youth, and this forc'd situation, this new 
awkward scene, impos'd and obtruded on me by cruel necessity.
     At supper, after a great many arguments used to comfort
and reconcile me to my fate, he told me that his name was 
H . . . , brother to the Earl of L . . . and that having, by
the suggestions of my landlady, been led to see me, he had
found me perfectly to his taste and given her a commission
to procure me at any rate, and that he had at length suc-
ceeded, as much to his satisfaction as he passionately
wished it might be to mine; adding, withal, some flattering
assurances that I should have no cause to repent my know-
     I had now got down at most half a partridge, and three
or four glasses of wine, which he compelled me to drink by
way of restoring nature; but whether there was anything ex-
traordinary put into the wine, or whether there wanted no
more to revive the natural warmth of my constitution and 
give fire to the old train, I began no longer to look with
that constraint, not to say disgust, on Mr. H . . ., which
I had hitherto done; but, withal, there was not the least
grain of love mix'd with this softening of my sentiments:
any other man would have been just the same to me as Mr.
H . . ., that stood in the same circumstances and had done
     There are not, on earth at least, eternal griefs; mine
were, if not at an end, at least suspended: my heart, which
had been so long overloaded with anguish and vexation, began
to dilate and open to the least gleam of diversion or amuse-
ment.  I wept a little, and my tears reliev'd me; I sigh'd,
and my sighs seem'd to lighten me of a load that oppress'd
me; my countenance grew, if not cheerful, at least more 
     Mr. H . . ., who had watched, perhaps brought on this
change, knew too well not to seize it; he thrust the table
imperceptibly from between us, and bringing his chair to
face me, he soon began, after preparing me by all the en-
dearments of assurances and protestations, to lay hold of
my hands, to kiss me, and once more to make free with my
bosom, which, being at full liberty from the disorder of a
loose dishabille, now panted and throbb'd, less with in-
dignation than with fear and bashfulness at being used so
familiarly by still a stranger.  But he soon gave me
greater occasion to exclaim, by stooping down and slipping
his hand above my garters: thence he strove to regain the
pass, which he had before found so open, and unguarded: but
not he could not unlock the twist of my thighs; I gently
complained, and begg'd him to let me alone; told him I was
now well.  However, as he saw there was more form and cere-
mony in my resistance than good earnest, he made his condi-
tions for desisting from pursuing his point that I should
be put instantly to bed, whilst he gave certain orders to
the landlady, and that he would return in an hour, when he
hoped to find me more recondil'd to his passion for me
than I seem'd at present.  I neither assented nor deny'd,
but my air and manner of receiving this proposal gave him
to see that I did not think myself enough my own mistress
     Accordingly he went out and left me, when, a minute or
two after, before I could recover myself into any composure
for thinking, the maid came in with her mistress's service,
and a small silver porringer of what she called a bridal
posset, and desir'd me to eat it as I went to bed, which
consequently I did, and felt immediately a heat, a fire run
like a hue-and-cry thro' every part of my body; I burnt,
I glow'd, and wanted even little of wishing for any man.
     The maid, as soon as I was lain down, took the candle
away, and wishing me a good night, went out of the room
     She had hardly time to get down-stairs before Mr. H .
. . open'd my room-door softly, and came in, now undress'd 
in his night-gown and cap, with two lighted wax candles, 
and bolting the door, gave me, tho' I expected him, some
sort of alarm.  He came a tip-toe to the bed-side, and 
said with a gentle whisper:  "Pray, my dear, do not be
startled . . . I will be very tender and kind to you."  He
then hurry'd off his cloaths, and leap'd into bed, having
given me openings enough, whilst he was stripping, to ob-
serve his brawny structure, strong-made limbs, and rough
     The bed shook again when it receiv'd this new load.
He lay on the outside, where he kept the candles burning,
no doubt for the satisfaction of ev'ry sense; for as soon
as he had kiss'd me, he rolled down the bed-cloaths, and
seemed transported with the view of all my person at full
length, which he cover'd with a profusion of kisses, spar-
ing no part of me.  Then, being on his knees between my 
legs, he drew up his shirt and bared all his hairy thighs,
and stiff staring truncheon, red-topt and rooted into a 
thicket of curls, which covered his belly to the navel and
gave it the air of a flesh brush; and soon I felt it join-
ing close to mine, when he had drove the nail up to the
head, and left no partition but the intermediate hair on
     I had it now, I felt it now, and, beginning to drive,
he soon gave nature such a powerful summons down to her
favourite quarters, that she could no longer refuse repair-
ing thither; all my animal spirits then rush'd mechanically
to that center of attraction, and presently, inly warmed,
and stirr'd as I was beyond bearing, I lost all restraint,
and yielding to the force of the emotion, gave down, as
mere woman, those effusions of pleasure, which, in the 
strictness of still faithful love, I could have wished to
     Yet oh! what an immense difference did I feel between
this impression of a pleasure merely animal, and struck out
of the collision of the sexes by a passive bodily effect,
from that sweet fury, that rage of active delight which
crowns the enjoyments of a mutual love-passion, where two
hearts, tenderly and truly united, club to exalt the joy,
and give it a spirit and soul that bids defiance to that 
end which mere momentary desires generally terminate in,
     Mr. H . . ., whom no distinctions of that sort seemed 
to disturb, scarce gave himself or me breathing time from
the last encounter, but, as if he had task'd himself to 
prove that the appearances of his vigour were not signs
hung out in vain, in a few minutes he was in a condition 
for renewing the onset; to which, preluding with a storm
of kisses, he drove the same course as before, with
unabated fervour; and thus, in repeated engagements, kept
me constantly in exercise till dawn of morning; in all
which time he made me fully sensible of the virtues of his
firm texture of limbs, his square shoulders, broad chest,
compact hard muscles, in short a system of namliness that
might pass for no bad image of our ancient sturdy barons,
when they wielded the battle-ax: whose race is now so 
thoroughly refin'd and frittered away into the more deli-
cate and modern-built frame of our pap-nerv'd softlings,
who are as pale, as pretty, and almost as masculine as
     Mr. H . . ., content, however, with having the day
break upon his triumphs, delivered me up to the refresh-
ment of a rest we both wanted, and we soon dropped into a
     Tho' he was some time awake before me, yet did he not
offer to disturb a repose he had given me so much occasion
for; but on my first stirring, which was not till past ten
o'clock, I was oblig'd to endure one more trial of his
     About eleven, in came Mrs. Jones, with two basins of 
the richest soup, which her experience in these matters had
mov'd her to prepare.  I pass over the fulsome compliments, 
the cant of the decent procuress, with which she saluted us
both; but tho' my blood rose at the sight of her, I supprest
my emotions, and gave all my concern to reflections on what
     But Mr. H . . ., who penetrated my uneasiness, did not
long suffer me to languish under it.  He acquainted me that,
having taken a solid sincere affection to me, he would begin
by giving me one leading mark of it by removing me out of a
house which must, for many reasons, be irksome and disagree-
able to me, into convenient lodgings, where he would take
all imaginable care of me; and desiring me not to have any
explanations with my landlady, or be impatient till he re-
turned, he dress'd and went out, having left me a purse
with two and twenty guineas in it, being all he had about
him, as he expresst it, to keep my pocket till further sup-
     As soon as he was gone, I felt the usual consequence
of the first launch into vice (for my love-attachment to
Charles never appear'd to me in that light).  I was instant-
ly borne away down the stream, without making back to the
shore.  My dreadful necessities, my gratitude, and above
all, to say the plain truth, the dissipation and diversion
I began to find, in this new acquaintance, from the black
corroding thoughts my heart had been a prey to ever since
the absence of my dear Charles, concurr'd to stun all con-
trary reflections.  If I now thought of my first, my only
charmer, it was still with the tenderness and regret of 
the fondest love, embitter'd with the consciousness that I
was no longer worthy of him.  I could have begg'd my bread
with him all over the world, but wretch that I was, I had
neither the virtue nor courage requisite not to outlive my
     Yet, had not my heart been thus pre-ingaged, Mr. H .
. . might probably have been the sole master of it; but
the place was full, and the force of conjunctures alone had
made him the possessor of my person; the charms of which
had, by the bye, been his sole object and passion, and
were, of course, no foundation for a love either very deli-
     He did not return till six in the evening to take me
away to my new lodgings; and my moveables being soon pack'd,
and convey'd into a hackney-coach, it cost me but little
regret to take my leave of a landlady whom I thought I had
so much reason not to be overpleas'd with; and as for her
part, she made no other difference to my staying or going,
     We soon got to the house appointed for me, which was
that of a plain tradesman who, on the score of interest, 
was entirely at Mr. H . . .'s devotion, and who let him the
first floor, very genteelly furnish'd, for two guineas a
week, of which I was instated mistress, with a maid to 
     He stayed with me that evening, and we had a supper
from a neighbouring tavern, after which, and a gay glass
or two, the maid put me to bed.  Mr. H . . . soon follow'd,
and notwithstanding the fatigues of the preceding night, I
found no quarter nor remission from him: he piqued himself,
as he told me, on doing the honours of my new apartment.
     The morning being pretty well advanc'd, we got to
breakfast; and the ice now broke, my heart, no longer en-
gross'd by love, began to take ease, and to please itself
with such trifles as Mr. H . . .'s liberal liking led him
to make his court to the usual vanity of our sex.  Silks,
laces, ear-rings, pearl-necklace, gold watch, in short, all
the trinkets and articles of dress were lavishly heap'd 
upon me; the sense of which, if it did not create returns
of love, forc'd a kind of grateful fondness something like
love; a distinction it would be spoiling the pleasure of 
nine tenths of the keepers in the town to make, and is, I
suppose, the very good reason why so few of them ever do
     I was now establish'd the kept mistress in form, well
lodg'd, with a very sufficient allowance, and lighted up
     Mr. H . . . continu'd kind and tender to me; yet, with
all this, I was far from happy; for, besides my regret for
my dear youth, which, though often suspended or diverted,
still return'd upon me in certain melancholic, moments with
redoubled violences, I wanted more society, more dissipation.
     As to Mr. H . . ., he was so much my superior in every
sense, that I felt it too much to the disadvantage of the
gratitude I ow'd him.  Thus he gain'd my esteem, though he
could not raise my taste;  I was qualify'd for no sort of
conversation with him except one sort, and that is a satis-
faction which leaves tiresome intervals, if not fill'd up
     Mr. H . . ., so experienc'd, so learned in the ways of
women, numbers of whom had passed through his hands, doubt-
less soon perceiv'd this uneasiness, and without approving
or liking me the better for it, had the complaisance to in-
     He made suppers at my lodgings, where he brought sev-
eral companions of his pleasures, with their mistresses;
and by this means I got into a circle of acquaintance that
soo strip'd me of all the remains of bashfulness and modesty
which might be yet left of my country education, and were,
to a just taste, perhaps the greatest of my charms.
     We visited one another in form, and mimic'd, as near
as we could, all the miseries, the follies, and imperti-
nences of the women of quality, in the round of which they
trifle away their time, without its ever entering into their
little heads that on earth there cannot subsist any thing
more silly, more flat, more insipid and worthless, than,
generally consider'd, their system of life is: they ought
to treat the men as their tyrants, indeed! were they to
     But tho', amongst the kept mistresses (and I was now
acquainted with a good many, besides some useful matrons,
who live by their connexions with them), I hardly knew one
that did not perfectly detest her keeper, and, of course,
made little or no scruple of any infidelity she could safely
accomplish, I had still no notion of wronging mine; for,
besides that no mark of jealousy on his side induced in me
the desire or gave me the provocation to play him a trick
of that sort, and that his constant generosity, politeness,
and tender attentions to please me forc'd a regard to him,
that without affecting my heart, insur'd him my fidelity, no
object had yet presented that could overcome the habitual
liking I had contracted for him; and I was on the eve of
obtaining, from the movements of his own voluntary generosity,
a modest provision for life, when an accident happen'd which
broke all the measures he had resolv'd upon in my favor.
     I had now liv'd near seven months with Mr. H . . .,
when one day returning to my lodgings from a visit in the
neighbourhood, where I us'd to stay longer, I found the
street door open, and the maid of the house standing at it,
talking with some of her acquaintances, so that I came in
without knocking; and, as I passed by, she told me Mr. H .
. . was above.  I stept up-stairs into my own bed-chamber,
with no other thought than of pulling off my hat, etc., and
then to wait upon him in the dining room, into which my
bed-chamber had a door, as is common enough.  Whilst I was
untying my hat-strings, I fancied I heard my maid Hannah's
voice and a sort of tussle, which raising my curiosity, I
stole softly to the door, where a knot in the wood had been
slipt out and afforded a very commanding peep-hole to the
scene then in agitation, the actors of which had been too
earnestly employ'd to hear my opening my own door, from the
     The first sight that struck me was Mr. H . . . pulling
and hauling this coarse country strammel towards a couch
that stood in a corner of the dining room; to which the girl
made only a sort of awkward boidening resistance, crying out 
so loud, that I, who listened at the door, could scarce hear
her:  "Pray sir, don't . . . , let me alone . . . I am not
for your turn . . . You cannot, sure, demean yourself with 
such a poor body as I . . . Lord!  Sir, my mistress may come
home . . . I must not indeed . . . I will cry out . . ."  
All of which did not hinder her from insensibly suffering
herself to be brought to the foot of the couch, upon which
a push of no mighty violence serv'd to give her a very easy
fall, and my gentleman having got up his hands to the
strong-hold of her VIRTUE, she, no doubt, thought it was
time to  give up the argument, and that all further de-
fense would be in vain: and he, throwing her petticoats over
her face, which was now as red as scarlet, discover'd a pair
of stout, plump, substantial thighs, and tolerably white; he
mounted them round his hips, and coming out with his drawn
weapon, stuck it in the cloven spot, where he seem'd to find
a less difficult entrance than perhaps he had flatter'd him-
self with (for, by the way, this blouze had left her place
in the country, for a bastard), and, indeed, all his motions
shew'd he was lodg'd pretty much at large.  After he had
done, his DEAREE gets up, drops her petticoats down, and
smooths her apron and handkerchief.  Mr. H . . . look'd a
little silly, and taking out some money, gave it her, with
an air indifferent enough, bidding her be a good girl, and
     Had I lov'd this man, it was not in nature for me to
have had patience to see the whole scene through: I should
have broke in and play'd the jealous princess with a ven-
geance.  But that was not the case, my pride alone was hurt,
my heart not, and I could easier win upon myself to see how
far he would go, till I had no uncertainty upon my conscience.
     The least delicate of all affairs of this sort being
now over, I retir'd softly into my closet, where I began to
consider what I should do.  My first scheme, naturally, was
to rush in and upbraid them; this, indeed, flatter'd my
present emotions and vexations, as it would have given im-
mediate vent to them; but, on second thoughts, not being so
clear as to the consequences to be apprehended from such a
step, I began to doubt whether it was not better to dissemble
my discovery till a safer season, when Mr. H . . . should 
have perfected the settlement he had made overtures to me of,
and which I was not to think such a violent explanation, as 
I was indeed not equal to the management of, could possibly
forward, and might destroy.  On the other hand, the provo-
cation seem'd too gross, too flagrant, not to give me some 
thoughts of revenge; the very start of which idea restor'd
me to perfect composure; and delighted as I was with the
confus'd plan of it in my head, I was easily mistress enough
of myself to support the part of ignorance I had prescrib'd
to myself; and as all this circle of reflections was in-
stantly over, I stole a tip-toe to the passage door, and
opening it with a noise, pass'd for having that moment come
home; and after a short pause, as if to pull off my things,
I opened the door into the dining room, where I found the
dowdy blowing the fire, and my faithful shepherd walking
about the room and whistling, as cool and unconcern'd as if
nothing had happened.  I think, however, he had not much to
brag of having out-dissembled me: for I kept up, nobly, the
character of our sex for art, and went up to him with the
same air of frankness as I had ever receiv'd him.  He stayed
but a little while, made some excuse for not being able to
     As for the wench, she was now spoil'd, at least for my
servant; and scarce eight and forty hours were gone round,
before her insolence, on what had pass'd between Mr. H . . .
and her, gave me so fair an occasion to turn her away, at a
minute's warning, that not to have done it would have been
the wonder: so that he could neither disapprove it nor find 
in it the least reason to suspect my original motive.  What
became of her afterwards, I know not; but generous as Mr.
H . . . was, he undoubtedly made her amends: though, I dare
answer, that he kept up no farther commerce with her of that
sort; as his stooping to such a coarse morsel was only a 
sudden sally of lust, on seeing a wholesome-looking, buxom
country-wench, and no more strange than hunger, or even a 
whimsical appetite's making a fling meal of neck-beef, for
     Had I consider'd this escapade of Mr. H . . . in no
more than that light and contented myself with turning away
the wench, I had thought and acted right; but, flush'd as I
was with imaginary wrongs, I should have held Mr. H . . .
to have been cheaply off, if I had not push'd my revenge
farther, and repaid him, as exactly as I could for the soul
     Nor was this worthy act of justice long delay'd: I had
it too much at heart.  Mr. H . . . had, about a fortnight
before, taken into his service a tenant's son, just come out
of the country, a very handsome young lad scarce turn'd of
nineteen, fresh as a rose, well shap'd and clever limb'd: in
short, a very good excuse for any woman's liking, even tho'
revenge had been out of the question; any woman, I say, who
was disprejudic'd, and had wit and spirit enough to prefer a
     Mr. H . . . had clap'd a livery upon him; and his chief
employ was, after being shewn my lodgings, to bring and
carry letters or messages between his master and me; and as
the situation of all kept ladies is not the fittest to
inspire respect, even to the meanest of mankind, and, perhaps,
less of it from the most ignorant, I could not help observing
that this lad, who was, I suppose, acquainted with my relation
to his master by his fellow-servants, used to eye me in that
bashful confus'd way, more expressive, more moving and readier
catch'd at by our sex, than any other declarations whatever:
my figure had, it seems, struck him, and modest and innocent
as he was, he did not himself know that the pleasure he took
in looking at me was love, or desire; but his eyes, naturally
wanton, and now enflam'd with passion, spoke a great deal
more than he durst have imagin'd they did.  Hitherto, indeed,
I had only taken notice of the comeliness of the youth, but
without the least design: my pride alone would have guarded
me from a thought that way, had not Mr. H . . .'s condescen-
sion with my maid, where there was not half the temptation in
point of person, set me a dangerous example; but now I began
to look on this stripling as every way a delicious instrument
of my design'd retaliation upon Mr. H . . . of an obligation
for which I should have made a conscience to die in his debt.
     In order then to pave the way for the accomplishment of
my scheme, for two or three times that the young fellow came
to me with messages, I manag'd so, as without affectation to
have him admitted to my bed-side, or brought to me at my 
toilet, where I was dressing; and by carelessly shewing or
letting him see, as if without meaning or design, sometimes
my bosom rather more bare than it should be; sometimes my
hair, of which I had a very fine head, in the natural flow
of it while combing; sometimes a neat leg, that had unfor-
tunately slipt its garter, which I made no scruple of tying
before him, easily gave him the impressions favourable to
my purpose, which I could perceive to sparkle in his eyes,
and glow in his cheeks: then certain slight squeezes by the
hand, as I took letters from him, did his business compleatly.
     When I saw him thus mov'd, and fired for my purpose, I
inflam'd him yet more, by asking him several leading ques-
tions, such as had he a mistress? . . . was she prettier than
me? . . . could he love such a one as I was? . . . and the
like; to all which the blushing simpleton answer'd to my wish,
in a strain of perfect nature, perfect undebauch'd innocence,
but with all the awkwardness and simplicity of country-
     When I thought I had sufficiently ripen'd him for the
laudable point I had in view, one day that I expected him
at a particular hour, I took care to have the coast clear
for the reception I design'd him; and, as I laid it, he
came to the dining-room door, tapped at it, and, on my bid-
ding him come in, he did so, and shut the door after him.
I desir'd him, then, to bolt it on the inside, pretending
     I was then lying at length upon that very couch, the
scene of Mr. H . . .'s polite joys, in an undress which
was with all the art of negligence flowing loose, and in a
most tempting disorder: no stay, no hoop . . . no incum-
brance whatever.  On the other hand, he stood at a little
distance, that gave me a full view of a fine featur'd,
shapely, healthy country lad, breathing the sweets of fresh
blooming youth; his hair, which was of a perfect shining
black, play'd to his face in natural side-curls, and was set
out with a smart tuck-up behind; new buckskin breeches, that,
clipping close, shew'd the shape of a plump, well made thigh;
white stockings, garter-lac'd livery, shoulder knot, alto-
gether compos'd a figure in which the beauties of pure flesh
and blood appeared under no disgrace form the lowness of a 
dress, to which a certain spruce neatness seems peculiarly
     I bid him come towards me and give me his letter, at
the same time throwing down, carelessly, a book I had in my
hands.  He colour'd, and came within reach of delivering me
the letter, which he held out, awkwardly enough, for me to
take, with his eyes riveted on my bosom, which was, through
the design'd disorder of my handkerchief, sufficiently bare,
     I, smiling in his face, took the letter, and immedi-
ately catching gently hold of his shirt sleeve, drew him
towards me, blushing, and almost trembling; for surely his
extreme bashfulness, and utter inexperience, call'd for, at
least, all the advances to encourage him: his body was now
conveniently inclin'd towards me, and just softly chucking
his smooth beardless chin, I asked him if he was afraid of
a lady? . . ., and, with that took, and carrying his hand
to my breasts, I prest it tenderly to them.  They were now
finely furnish'd, and rais'd in flesh, so that, panting
with desire, they rose and fell, in quick heaves, under his
touch: at this, the boy's eyes began to lighten with all
the fires of inflam'd nature, and his cheeks flush'd with a
deep scarlet: tongue-tied with joy, rapture, and bashful-
ness, he could not speak, but then his looks, his emotion,
sufficiently satisfy'd me that my train had taken, and that
     My lips, which I threw in his way, so as that he could
not escape kissing them, fix'd, fired, and embolden'd him:
and now, glancing my eyes towards that part of his dress
which cover'd the essential object of enjoyment, I plainly
discover'd the swell and commotion there; and as I was now
too far advanc'd to stop in so fair a way, and was indeed no
longer able to contain myself, or wait the slower progress
of his maiden bashfulness (for such it seem'd, and really 
was), I stole my hand upon his thighs, down one of which I
could both see and feel a stiff hard body, confin'd by his
breeches, that my fingers could discover no end to.  Curious
then, and eager to unfold so alarming a mystery, playing, as
it were, with his buttons, which were bursting ripe from the
active force within, those of his waistband and fore-flap
flew open at a touch, when out IT started; and now, dis-
engag'd from the shirt, I saw, with wonder and surprise,
what? not the play-thing of a boy, not the weapon of a man,
but a maypole of so enormous a standard, that had propor-
tions been observ'd, it must have belong'd to a young giant.
Its prodigious size made me shrink again; yet I could not,
without pleasure, behold, and even ventur'd to feel, such a
length, such a breadth of animated ivory! perfectly well
turn'd and fashion'd, the proud stiffness of which distended
its skin, whose smooth polish and velvet softness might vie
with that of the most delicate of our sex, and whose exqui-
site whiteness was not a little set off by a sprout of black
curling hair round the root, through the jetty sprigs of
which the fair skin shew'd as in a fine evening you may have
remark'd the clear light ether throught the branchwork of
distant trees over-topping the summit of a hill: then the
broad and blueish-casted incarnate of the head, and blue
serpentines of its veins, altogether compos'd the most
striking assemblage of figure and colours in nature.  In
     But what was yet more surprising, the owner of this
natural curiosity, through the want of occasions in the
strictness of his home-breeding, and the little time he had
been in town not having afforded him one, was hitherto an
absolute stranger, in practice at least, to the use of all
that manhood he was so nobly stock'd with; and it now fell
to my lot ot stand his first trial of it, if I could resolve
to run the risks of its disproportion to that tender part
of me, which such an oversiz'd machine was very fit to lay
     But it was now of the latest to deliberate; for, by 
this time, the young fellow, overheated with the present
objects, and too high mettled to be longer curb'd in by
that modesty and awe which had hitherto restrain'd him,
ventur'd, under the stronger impulse and instructive promp-
tership of nature alone, to slip his hands, trembling with
eager impetuous desires, under my petticoats; and seeing,
I suppose, nothing extremely severe in my looks to stop or
dash him, he feels out, and seizes, gently, the center-spot
of his ardours.  Oh then! the fiery touch of his fingers
determines me, and my fears melting away before the glowing
intolerable heat, my thighs disclose of themselves, and 
yield all liberty to his hand: and now, a favourable move-
ment giving my petticoats a toss, the avenue lay too fair,
too open to be miss'd.  He is now upon me:  I had placed
myself with a jet under him, as commodious and open as
possible to his attempts, which were untoward enough, for
his machine, meeting with no inlet, bore and batter'd
stiffly against me in random pushes, now above, now below,
now beside his point; till, burning with impatience from
its irritating touches, I guided gently, with my hand,
this furious engine to where my young novice was now to be
taught his first lesson of pleasure.  Thus he nick'd, at
length, the warm and insufficient orifice; but he was made
to find no breach impracticable, and mine, tho' so often
enter'd, was still far from wide enough to take him easily
     By my direction, however, the head of his unwieldy
machine was so critically pointed that, feeling him fore-
right against the tender opening, a favourable motion from
me met his timely thrust, by which the lips of it, strenu-
ously dilated, gave way to his thus assisted impetuosity,
so that we might both feel that he had gain'd a lodgement.
Pursuing then his point, he soon, by violent, and, to me,
most painful piercing thrusts, wedges himself at length so
far in, as to be now tolerably secure of his entrance: here
he stuck, and I now felt such a mixture of pleasure and 
pain, as there is no giving a definition of.  I dreaded
alike his splitting me farther up, or his withdrawing;  I
could not bear either to keep or part with him.  The sense
of pain however prevailing, from his prodigious size and
stiffness, acting upon me in those continued rapid thrusts,
with which he furiously pursu'd his penetration, made me
cry out gently:  "Oh! my dear, you hurt me!"  This was
enough to check the tender respectful boy even in his mid-
career; and he immediately drew out the sweet cause of my
complaint, whilst his eyes eloquently express'd, at once, 
his grief for hurting me, and his reluctance at dislodging
from quarters of which the warmth and closeness had given
him a gust of pleasure that he was now desire-mad to satisfy,
and yet too much a novice not to be afraid of my withholding
his relief, on account ot the pain he had put me to.
     But I was, myself, far from being pleas'd with his
having too much regarded my tender exclaims; for now, more
and more fired with the object before me, as it still stood
with the fiercest erection, unbonnetted, and displaying its
broad bermilion head, I first gave the youth a re-encourag-
ing kiss, which he repaid me with a fervour that seem'd at
once to thank me, and bribe my farther compliance; and soon
replac'd myself in a posture to receive, at all risks, the
renew'd invasion, which he did not delay an instant: for,
being presently remounted, I once more felt the smooth hard
gristle forcing an entrance, which he achiev'd rather easier
than before.  Pain'd, however, as I was, with his efforts of
gaining a complete admission, which he was so regardful as 
to manage by gentle degrees, I took care not to complain.  
In the meantime, the soft strait passage gradually loosens,
yields, and, stretch'd to its utmost bearing, by the stiff,
thick, indriven engine, sensible, at once, to the ravishing
pleasure of the feel and the pain of the distension, let him
in about half way, when all the most nervous activity he now
exerted, to further his penetration, gain'd him not an inch
of his purpose: for, whilst he hesitated there, the crisis
of pleasure overtook him, and the close compressure of the
warm surrounding fold drew from him the extatic gush, even
before mine was ready to meet it, kept up by the pain I had
endur'd in the course ot the engagement, from the insuffer-
able size of his weapon, tho' it was not as yet in above
     I expected then, but without wishing it, that he would
draw, but was pleasantly disappointed: for he was not to be
let off so.  The well breath'd youth, hot-mettled, and
flush with genial juices, was now fairly in for making me
know my driver.  As soon, then, as he had made a short
pause, waking, as it were, out of the trance of pleasure
(in which every sense seem'd lost for a while, whilst, with
his eyes shut, and short quick breathing, he had yielded
down his maiden tribute), he still kept his post, yet unsated
with enjoyment, and solacing in these so new delights; till
his stiffness, which had scarce perceptibly remitted, being
thoroughly recovered to him, who had not once unsheath'd, he
proceeded afresh to cleave and open to himself an entire
entry into me, which was not a little made easy to him by
the balsamic injection with which he had just plentifully
moisten'd the whole internals of the passage.  Redoubling,
then, the active energy of his thrusts, favoured by the
fervid appetite of my motions, the soft oiled wards can no
longer stand so effectual a picklock, but yield, and open
him an entrance.  And now, with conspiring nature, and my
industry, strong to aid him, he pierces, penetrates, and at
length, winning his way inch by inch, gets entirely in, and
finally mighty thrust sheaths it up to the guard; on the in-
formation of which, from the close jointure of our bodies
(insomuch that the hair on both sides perfectly interweav'd
and incircl'd together), the eyes of the transported youth
sparkl'd with more joyous fires, and all his looks and mo-
tions acknowledged excess of pleasure, which I now began to
share, for I felt him in my very vitals!  I was quite sick
with delight! stir'd beyond bearing with its furious agita-
tions within me, and gorged and cramm'd, even to surfeit. 
Thus I lay gasping, panting under him, till his broken
breathings, faltering accents, eyes twinkling with humid
fires, lunges more furious, and an increased stiffness,
gave me to hail the approaches of the second period: it came
. . . and the sweet youth, overpower'd with the extasy, died
away in my arms, melting in a flood that shot in genial
warmth into the innermost recesses of my body; every conduit
of which, dedicated to that pleasure, was on flow to mix with
it.  Thus we continued for some instants, lost, breathless,
senseless of every thing, and in every part but those fav-
ourite ones of nature, in which all that we enjoyed of life
     When our mutual trance was a little over, and the young
fellow had withdrawn that delicious stretcher, with which he
had most plentifully drowned all thoughts of revenge in the
sense of actual pleasure, the widen'd wounded passage refunded
a stream of pearly liquids, which flowed down my thighs, mixed
with streaks of blood, the marks of the ravage of that montrous
machine of his, which had now triumph'd over a kind of second
maidenhead.  I stole, however, my handkerchief to those parts,
and wip'd them as dry as I could, whilst he was re-adjusting
     I made him now sit down by me, and as he had gather'd
courage from such extreme intimacy, he gave me an after-
course of pleasure, in a natural burst of tender gratitude
and joy, at the new scenes of bliss I had opened to him:
scenes positively new, as he had never before had the least
acquaintance with that mysterious mark, the cloven stamp of
female distinction, tho' nobody better qualify'd than he to
penetrate into its deepest recesses, or do it nobler justice.
But when, by certain motions, certain unquietnesses of his
hands, that wandered not without design, I found he lan-
guish'd for satisfying a curiosity, natural enough, to view
and handle those parts which attract and concentre the
warmest force of imagination, charmed as I was to have any
occasion of obliging and humouring his young desires, I
suffer'd him to proceed as he pleased, without check or
     Easily, then, reading in my eyes the full permission of
myself to all his wishes, he scarce pleased himself more
than me when, having insinuated his hand under my petticoat
and shift, he presently removed those bars to the sight by
slyly lifting them upwards, under favour of a thousand
kisses, which he thought, perhaps, necessary to divert my
attention from what he was about.  All my drapery being now
roll'd up to my waist, I threw myself into such a posture
upon the couch, as gave up to him, in full view, the whole
region of delight, and all the luxurious landscape round it.
The transported youth devour'd every thing with his eyes, 
and try'd, with his fingers, to lay more open to his sight
the secrets of that dark and delicious deep: he opens the
folding lips, the softness of which, yielding entry to any
thing of a hard body, close round it, and oppose the sight:
and feeling further, meets with, and wonders at, a soft
fleshy excrescence, which, limber and relaxed after the late
enjoyment, now grew, under the touch and examination of his
fiery fingers, more and more stiff and considerable, till 
the titillating ardours of that so sensible part made me
sigh, as if he had hurt me; on which he withdrew his curious
probing fingers, asking me pardon, as it were, in a kiss
     Novelty ever makes the strongest impressions, and in
pleasures, especially; no wonder, then, that he was swallowed
up in raptures of admiration of things so interesting by
their nature, and now seen and handled for the first time.
On my part, I was richly overpaid for the pleasure I gave
him, in that of examining the power of those objects thus
abandon'd to him, naked and free to his loosest wish, over
the artless, natural stripling: his eyes streaming fire, his
cheeks glowing with a florid red, his fervid frequent sighs,
whilst his hands convulsively squeez'd, opened, pressed to-
gether again the lips and sides of that deep flesh wound, or
gently twitched the overgrowing moss; and all proclaimed the
excess, the riot of joys, in having his wantonness thus
humour'd.  But he did not long abuse my patience, for the 
objects before him had now put him by all his, and, coming 
out with that formidable machine of his, he lets the fury
loose, and pointing it directly to the pouting-lipt mouth, 
that bid him sweet defiance in dumb-shew, squeezes in the
head, and, driving with refreshed rage, breaks in, and plugs
up the whole passage of that soft pleasure-conduit, where
he makes all shake again, and put, once more, all within me
into such an uproar, as nothing could still but a fresh in-
undation from the very engine of those flames, as well as
from all the springs with which nature floats that reservoir
     I was now so bruised, so batter'd, so spent with this
over-match, that I could hardly stir, or raise myself, but
lay palpitating, till the ferment of my sense subsiding by
degrees, and the hour striking at which I was oblig'd to 
dispatch my young man, I tenderly advised him of the neces-
sity there was for parting; which I felt as much displeasure
at as he could do, who seemed eagerly disposed to keep the
field, and to enter on a fresh action.  But the danger was
too great, and after some hearty kisses of leave, and recom-
mendations of secrecy and discretion, I forc'd myself to
send him away, not without assurances of seeing him again,
to the same purpose, as soon as possible, and thrust a guinea
into his hands: not more, lest, being too flush of money, a
suspicion or discovery might arise from thence, having every
thing to fear from the dangerous indiscretion of that age in
which young fellows would be too irresistible, too charming,
if we had not that terrible fault to guard against.
     Giddy and intoxicated as I was with such satiating
draughts of pleasure, I still lay on the couch, supinely 
stretched out, in a delicious languor diffus'd over all my
limbs, hugging myself for being thus revenged to my heart's
content, and that in a manner so precisely alike, and on the
identical spot in which I had received the supposed injury.
No reflections on the consequences ever once perplex'd me,
nor did I make myself one single reproach for having, by
this step, completely entered myself of a profession more
decry'd than disused.  I should have held it ingratitude to
the pleasure I had received to have repented of it; and
since I was now over the bar, I thought, by plunging over
head and ears into the stream I was hurried away by, to
     Whilst I was thus making these laudable dispositions,
and whispering to myself a kind of tacit vow of inconti-
nency, enters Mr. H . . .  The consciousness of what I had
been doing deepen'd yet the glowing of my cheeks, flushed
with the warmth of the late action, which, joined to the
piquant air of my dishabille, drew from Mr. H . . . a com-
pliment on my looks, which he was proceeding to back the
sincerity of with proofs, and that with so brisk an action
as made me tremble for fear of a discovery from the condi-
tion of those parts were left in from their late severe
handling: the orifice dilated and inflamed, the lips swollen
with their uncommon distension, the ringlets press down,
crushed and uncurl'd with the over-flowing moisture that
had wet every thing round it; in short, the different feel
and state of things would hardly have passed upon one of Mr.
H . . .'s nicety and experience unaccounted for but by the
real cause.  But here the woman saved me: I pretended a
violent disorder of my head, and a feverish heat, that in-
disposed me too much to receive his embraces.  He gave in to
this, and good-naturedly desisted.  Soon after, an old lady
coming in made a third, very a-propos for the confusion I 
was in, and Mr. H . . ., after bidding me take care of my-
self, and recommending me to my repose, left me much at ease
     In the close of the evening, I took care to have pre-
par'd for me a warm bath of aromatick and sweet herbs; in
which having fully laved and solaced myself, I came out
     The next morning, waking pretty early, after a night's
perfect rest and composure, it was not without some dread
and uneasiness that I thought of what innovation that ten-
der, soft system of mine might have sustained from the shock
     Struck with this apprehension, I scarce dared to carry
my hand thither, to inform myself of the state and posture
     The silky hair that covered round the borders, now
smooth'd and re-pruned, had resumed its wonted curl and
trimness; the fleshy pouting lips that had stood the brunt
of the engagement, were no longer swollen or moisture-
drenched; and neither they, nor the passage into which they
opened, that suffered so great a dilatation, betray'd any
the least alteration, outward or inwardly, to the most
curious research, notwithstanding also the laxity that
     This continuation of that grateful stricture which is
in us, to the men, the very jet of their pleasure, I ow'd,
it seems, to a happy habit of body, juicy, plump and fur-
nished towards the texture of those parts, with a fullness
of soft springy flesh, that yielding sufficiently, as it 
does, to almost any distension soon recovers itself so as
to retighten that strict compression of its mantlings and
folds, which form the sides of the passage, wherewith it so
tenderly embraces and closely clips any foreign body intro-
duc'd into it, such as my exploring finger then was.
     Finding then every thing in due tone and order, I
remember'd my fears, only to make a jest of them to myself.
and now, palpably mistress of nay size of man, and tri-
umphing in my double achievement of pleasure and revenge, I
abandon'd myself entirely to the ideas of all the delight I
had swam in.  I lay stretching out, glowingly alive all over,
and tossing with burning impatience for the renewal of joys
that had sinned but in a sweet excess; now did I loose my
longing, for about ten in the morning, according to expect-
ation, Will, my new humble sweetheart, came with a message
from his master, Mr. H . . ., to know how I did.  I had taken
care to send my maid on an errand into the city, that I was
sure would take up time enough; and, from the people of the
house, I had nothing to fear, as they were plain good sorts 
of folks, and wise enough to mind no more other people's
     All dispositions then made, not forgetting that of
lying in bed to receive him, when he was entered the door
of my bed-chamber, a latch, that I governed by a wire, des-
     I could not but observe that my young minion was as 
much spruced out as could be expected from one in his con-
dition: a desire of pleasing that could not be indifferent
to me, since it prov'd that I pleased him; which, I assure
you, was now a point I was not above having in view.
     His hair trimly dressed, clean linen, and, above all,
a hale, ruddy, wholesome country look, made him out as
pretty a piece of woman's meat as you could see, and I
should have thought nay one much out of taste that could
not have made a hearty meal of such a morsel as nature
seemed to have  design'd for the highest diet of pleasure.
     And why should I here suppress the delight I received
from this amiable creature, in remarking each artless look,
each motion of pure undissembled nature, betrayed by his
wanton eyes; or shewing, transparently, the glow and suf-
fusion of blood through his fresh, clear skin, whilst even
his sturdy rustic pressures wanted not their peculiar
charm?  Oh! but, say you, this was a young fellow of too
low a rank of life to deserve so great a display.  May be
so: but was my condition, strictly consider'd one jot more
exalted? or, had I really been much above him, did not his
capacity of giving such exquisite pleasure sufficiently
raise and ennoble him, to me, at least?  Let who would,
for me, cherish, respect, and reward the painter's, the
statuary's, the musician's arts, in proportion to delight
taken in them: but at my age, and with my taste for plea-
sure, a taste strongly constitutional to me, the talent of
pleasing, with which nature has endowed a handsome person,
form'd to me the greatest of all merits; compared to which,
the vulgar prejudices in favour of titles, dignities,
honours, and the like, held a very low rank indeed.  Nor
perhaps would the beauties of the body be so much affected
to be held cheap, were they, in their nature, to be bought
and delivered.  But for me, whose natural philosophy all
resided in the favourite center of sense, and who was rul'd
by its powerful instinct in taking pleasure by its right
handle, I could scarce have made a choice more to my purpose.
     Mr. H . . .'s loftier qualifications of birth, fortune
and sense laid me under a sort of subjection and constraint
that were far from making harmony in the concert of love, 
nor had he, perhaps, thought me worth softening that superi-
ority to; but, with this lad, I was more on that level which
     We may say what we please, but those we can be the easi-
est and freest with are ever those we like, not to say love,
     With this stripling, all whose art of love was the
action of it, I could, without check of awe or restraint,
give a loose to joy, and execute every scheme of dalliance
my fond fancy might put me on, in which he was, in every
sense, a most exquisite companion.  And now my great plea-
sure lay in humouring all the petulances, all the wanton
frolic of a raw novice just fleshed, and keen on the burning
scent of his game, but unbroken to the sport: and, to carry
on the figure, who could better TREAD THE WOOD than he, or
     He advanc'd then to my bed-side, and whilst he fal-
tered out his message, I could observe his colour rise, and
his eyes lighten with joy, in seeing me in a situation as
favourable to his loosest wishes as if he had bespoke the
     I smiled, and put out my hand towards him, which he
kneeled down to (a politeness taught him by love alone, 
that great master of it) and greedily kiss'd.  After
exchanging a few confused questions and answers, I ask'd 
him if he would come to bed to me, for the little time I
could venture to detain him.  This was just asking a person,
dying with hunger, to feast upon the dish on earth the most
to his palate.  Accordingly, without further reflection,
his cloaths were off in an instant; when, blushing still
more at his new liberty, he got under the bed-cloaths I held
up to receive him, and was now in bed with a woman for the
     Here began the usual tender preliminaries, as delicious,
perhaps, as the crowning act of enjoyment itself; which they
often beget an impatience of, that makes pleasure destruc-
tive of itself, by hurrying on the final period, and closing
that scene of bliss, in which the actors are generally too
well pleas'd with their parts not to wish them an eternity
     When we had sufficiently graduated our advances towards
the main point, by toying, kissing, clipping, feeling my
breasts, now round and plump, feeling that part of me I might
call a furnace-mouth, from the prodigious intense heat his
fiery touches had rekindled there, my young sportsman, em-
bolden'd by every freedom he could wish, wantonly takes my
hand, and carries it to that enormous machine of his, that
stood with a stiffness! a hardness! an upward bent of erec-
tion! and which, together with its bottom dependence, the
inestimable bulge of lady's jewels, formed a grand show out
of goods indeed!  Then its dimensions, mocking either grasp
     I could not conceive how, or by what means I could 
take, or put such a bulk out of sight.  I stroked it gently,
on which the mutinous rogue seemed to swell, and gather a
new degree of fierceness and insolence; so that finding it
grew not to be trifled with any longer, I prepar'd for rub-
     Slipping then a pillow under me, that I might give him
the fairest play, I guided officiously with my hand this
furious battering ram, whose ruby head, presenting nearest
the resemblance of a heart, I applied to its proper mark,
which lay as finely elevated as we could wish; my hips
being borne up, and my thighs at their utmost extension,
the gleamy warmth that shot from it made him feel that he
was at the mouth of the indraught, and driving foreright,
the powerfully divided lips of that pleasure-thirsty
channel receiv'd him.  He hesitated a little; then, set-
tled well in the passage, he makes his way up the straits
of it, with a difficulty nothing more than pleasing, widen-
ing as he went, so as to distend and smooth each soft fur-
row: our pleasure increasing deliciously, in proportion as
our points of mutual touch increas'd in that so vital part
of me in which I had now taken him, all indriven, and com-
pletely sheathed; and which, crammed as it was, stretched,
splitting ripe, gave it so gratefully strait an accommoda-
tion! so strict a fold! a suction so fierce! that gave and
took unutterable delight.  We had now reach'd the closest
point of union; but when he backened to come on the fiercer,
as if I had been actuated by a fear of losing him, in the
height of my fury I twisted my legs round his naked loins,
the flesh of which, so firm, so springy to the touch,
quiver'd again under the pressure; and now I had him every
way encircled and begirt; and having drawn him home to me,
I kept him fast there, as if I had sought to unite bodies
with him at that point.  This bred a pause of action, a
pleasure stop, whilst that delicate glutton, my nether-
mouth, as full as it could hold, kept palating, with ex-
quisite relish, the morsel that so deliciously ingorged it.
But nature could not long endure a pleasure that so highly 
provoked without satisfying it: pursuing then its darling
end, the battery recommenc'd with redoubled exertion; nor
lay I inactive on my side, but encountering him with all
the impetuosity of motion but encountering him with all
the impetuosity of motion I was mistress of.  The downy
cloth of our meeting mounts was now of real use to break
the violence of the tilt; and soon, too soon indeed! the
highwrought agitation, the sweet urgency of this to-and-fro
friction, raised the titillation on me to its height; so 
that finding myself on the point of going, and loath to
leave the tender partner of my joys behind me, I employed
all the forwarding motions and arts my experience suggested
to me, to promote his keeping me company to our journey's
end.  I not only then tighten'd the pleasure-girth round my
restless inmate by a secret spring of friction and compres-
sion that obeys the will in those parts, but stole my hand
softly to that store bag of nature's prime sweets, which is
so pleasingly attach'd to its conduit pipe, from which we
receive them; there feeling, and most gently indeed, squeez-
ing those tender globular reservoirs; the magic touch took
instant effect, quicken'd, and brought on upon the spur the
symptoms of that sweet agony, the melting moment of dissolu-
tion, when pleasure dies by pleasure, and the mysterious
engine of it overcomes the titillation it has rais'd in 
those parts, by plying them with the stream of a warm li-
quid that is itself the highest of all titillations, and
which they thirstily express and draw in like the hot-
natured leach, which to cool itself, tenaciously attracts
all the moisture within its sphere of exsuction.  Chiming
then to me, with exquisite consent, as I melted away, his
oily balsamic injection, mixing deliciously with the sluices
in flow from me, sheath'd and blunted all the stings of
pleasure, it flung us into an extasy that extended us faint-
ing, breathless, entranced.  Thus we lay, whilst a voluptuous
languor possest, and still maintain'd us motionless and fast
locked in one another's arms.  Alas! that these delights
should be no longer-lived! for now the point of pleasure,
unedged by enjoyment, and all the brisk sensations flat-
ten'd upon us, resigned us up to the cool cares of insipid
life.  Disengaging myself then from his embrace, I made him
sensible of the reasons there were for his present leaving
me; on which, though reluctantly, he put on his cloaths with
as little expedition, however, as he could help, wantonly
interrupting himself, between whiles, with kisses, touches
and embraces I could not refuse myself to.  Yet he happily
return'd to his master before he was missed; but, at taking 
leave, I forc'd him (for he had sentiments enough to refuse
it) to receive money enough to buy a silver watch, that
great article of subaltern finery, which he at length ac-
cepted of, as a remembrance he was carefully to preserve of
     And here, Madam, I ought, perhaps, to make you an apol-
ogy for this minute detail of things, that dwelt so strongly
upon my memory, after so deep an impression: but, besides
that this intrigue bred one great revolution in my life,
which historical truth requires I should not sink from you,
may I not presume that so exalted a pleasure ought not to be
ungratefully forgotten, or suppress'd by me, because I found
it in a character in low life; where, by the bye, it is of-
tener met with, purer, and more unsophisticate, that among
the false, ridiculous refinements with which the great suf-
fer themselves to be so grossly cheated by their pride: the
great! than whom there exist few amongst those they call
the vulgar, who are more ignorant of, or who cultivate less,
the art of living than they do; they, I say, who for ever
mistake things the most foreign of the nature of pleasure
itself; whose capital favourite object is enjoyment of
beauty, wherever that rare invaluable gift is found, without
     As love never had, so now revenge had no longer any 
share in my commerce with this handsome youth.  The sole
pleasures of enjoyment were now the link I held to him by:
for though nature had done such great matters for him in
his outward form, and especially in that superb piece of
furniture she had so liberally enrich'd him with; though he
was thus qualify'd to give the senses their richest feast,
still there was something more wanting to create in me, and
constitute the passion of love.  Yet Will had very good
qualities too; gentle, tractable, and, above all, grateful;
close, and secret, even to a fault: he spoke, at any time,
very little, but made it up emphatically with action; and,
to do him justice, he never gave me the least reason to
complain, either of any tendency to encroach upon me for
the liberties I allow'd him, or of his indiscretion in
blabbing them.  There is, then, a fatality in love, or have
loved him I must; for he was really a treasure, a bit for
the BONNE BOUCHE of a duchess; and, to say the truth, my
liking for him was so extreme, that it was distinguishing
     My happiness, however, with him did not last long, but
found an end from my own imprudent neglect.  After having
taken even superfluous precautions against a discovery, our
success in repeated meetings embolden'd me to omit the barely
necessary ones.  About a month after our first intercourse, 
one fatal morning (the season Mr. H . . . rarely or never
visited me in) I was in my closet, where my toilet stood, in
nothing but my shift, a bed gown and under-petticoat.  Will 
was with me, and both ever too well disposed to baulk an
opportunity.  For my part, a warm whim, a wanton toy had
just taken me, and I had challeng'd my man to execute it on
the spot, who hesitated not to comply with my humour: I was
set in the arm-chair, my shift and petticoat up, my thighs
wide spread and mounted over the arms of the chair, present-
ing the fairest mark to Will's drawn weapon, which he stood
in act to plunge into me; when, having neglected to secure
the chamber door, and that of the closet standing a-jar, Mr.
H . . . stole in upon us before either of us was aware, and
     I gave a great scream, and drop'd my petticoat: the
thunder-struck lad stood trembling and pale, waiting his
sentence of death.  Mr. H . . . looked sometimes at one,
sometimes at the other, with a mixture of indignation and
scorn; and, without saying a word, turn'd upon his heel and
     As confused as I was, I heard him very distinctly turn
the key, and lock the chamber-door upon us, so that there 
was no escape but through the dining-room, where he himself
was walking about with distempered strides, stamping in a
great chafe, and doubtless debating what he would do with
     In the mean time, poor William was frightened out of 
his senses, and, as much need as I had of spirits to sup-
port myself, I was obliged to employ them all to keep his
a little up.  The misfortune I had now brought upon him,
endear'd him the more to me, and I could have joyfully suf-
fered any punishment he had not shared in.  I water'd,
plentifully, with my tears, the face of the frightened youth,
who sat, not having strength to stand, as cold and as life-
     Presently Mr. H . . . comes in to us again, and made
us go before him into the dining-room, trembling and dread-
ing the issue.  Mr. H . . . sat down on a chair whilst we
stood like criminals under examination; and beginning with
me, ask'd me, with an even firm tone of voice, neither soft
nor severe, but cruelly indifferent, what I could say for
myself, for having abused him in so unworthy a manner, with
his own servant too, and how he had deserv'd this of me?
     Without adding to the guilt of my infidelity that of
an audacious defence of it, in the old style of a common
kept Miss, my answer was modest, and often interrupted by my
tears, in substance as follows: that I never had a single
thought of wronging him (which was true), till I had seen
him taking the last liberties with my servant-wench (here he
colour'd prodigiously), and that my resentment at that,
which I was over-awed from giving vent to by complaints, or
explanations with him, had driven me to a course that I did
not pretend to justify; but that as to the young man, he was
entirely faultless; for that, in the view of making him the
instrument of my revenge, I had down-right seduced him to
what he had done; and therefore hoped, whatever he deter-
mined about me, he would distinguish between the guilty and
the innocent; and that, for the rest, I was entirely at his
     Mr. H . . ., on hearing what I said, hung his head a
little; but instantly recovering himself, he said to me, 
as near as I can retain, to the following purpose:
     "Madam, I owe shame to myself, and confess you have
fairly turn'd the tables upon me.  It is not with one of
your cast of breeding and sentiments that I should enter
into a discussion of the very great difference of the pro-
vocations: be it sufficient that I allow you so much
reason on your side, as to have changed my resolutions, in
consideration of what you reproach me with; and I own, too,
that your clearing that rascal there, is fair and honest in
you.  Renew with you I cannot: the affront is too gross.  I
give you a week's warning to go out of these lodgings;
whatever I have given you, remains to you; and as I never
intend to see you more, the landlord will pay you fifty
pieces on my account, with which, and every debt paid, I 
hope you will own I do not leave you in a worse condition
than what I took you up in, or than you deserve of me.
     Then, without giving me time to reply, he address'd 
     "For you, spark, I shall, for your father's sake, take
care of you: the town is no place for such an easy fool as 
thou art; and to-morrow you shall set out, under the charge
of one of my men, well recommended, in my name, to your
father, not to let you return and be spoil'd here."
     At these words he went out, after my vainly attempting
to stop him by throwing myself at his feet.  He shook me off,
though he seemed greatly mov'd too, and took Will away with
him, who,  I dare swear, thought himself very cheaply off.
     I was now once more a-drift, and left upon my own hands,
by a gentleman whom I certainly did not deserve.  And all the
letters, arts, friends' entreaties that I employed within the
week of grace in my lodging, could never win on him so much
as to see me again.  He had irrevocably pornounc'd my doom,
and submission to it was my only part.  Soon after he married
a lady of birth and fortune, to whom, I have heard, he prov'd
     As for poor Will, he was immediately sent down to the
country to his father, who was an easy farmer, where he was
not four months before and inn-keeper's buxom young widow,
with a very good stock, both in money and trade, fancy'd,
and perhaps pre-acquainted with his secret excellencies,
marry'd him: and I am sure there was, at least, one good
     Though I should have been charm'd to see him before
he went, such measures were taken, by Mr. H . . .'s orders, 
that it was impossible; otherwise I should certainly have
endeavour'd to detain him in town, and would have spared
neither offers nor expence to have procured myself the
satisfaction of keeping him with me.  He had such powerful
holds upon my inclinations as were not easily to be shaken
off, or replaced; as to my heart, it was quite out of the
question: glad, however, I was from my soul, that nothing
worse, and as things turn'd out, probably nothing better
     As to Mr. H . . ., though views of conveniency made
me, at first, exert myself to regain his affection, I was
giddy and thoughtless enough to be much easier reconcil'd
to my failure than I ought to have been; but as I never had
lov'd him, and his leaving me gave me a sort of liberty that
I had often long'd for, I was soon comforted; and flattering
myself that the stock of youth and beauty I was going into
trade with could hardly fail of procuring me a maintenance,
I saw myself under a necessity of trying my fortune with
them, rather, with pleasure and gaiety, than with the least
     In the mean time, several of my acquaintances among
the sisterhood, who had soon got wind of my misfortune,
flocked to insult me with their malicious consolations.
Most of them had long envied me the affluence and splendour
I had been maintain'd in; and though there was scarce one
of them that did not at least deserve to be in my case, and
would probably, sooner or later, come to it, it was equally
easy to remark, even in their affected pity, their secret
pleasure at seeing me thus disgrac'd and discarded, and
their secret grief that it was no worse with me.  Unaccount-
able malice of the human heart! and which is not confin'd
     But as the time approached for me to come to some
resolution how to dispose of myself, and I was considering
round where to shift my quarters to, Mrs. Cole, a middle-
aged discreet sort of woman, who had been brought into my
acquaintance by one ot the Misses that visited me, upon
learning my situation, came to offer her cordial advice and
service to me; and as I had always taken to her more than
to any of my female acquaintances, I listened the easier to 
her proposals.  And, as it happened, I could not have put
myself into worse, or into better hands in all London: into
worse, because keeping a house of conveniency, there were 
no lengths in lewdness she would not advise me to go, in
compliance with her customers; no schemes of pleasure, or
even unbounded debauchery, she did not take even a delight
in promoting: into a better, because nobody having had more
experience of the wicked part of the town than she had, was
fitter to advise and guard one against the worst dangers of
our profession; and what was rare to be met with in those
of her's, she contented herself with a moderate living pro-
fit upon her industry and good offices, and had nothing of
their greedy rapacious turn.  She was really too a gentle-
woman born and bred, but through a train of accidents
reduc'd to this course, which she pursued, partly through
necessity, partly through choice, as never woman delighted
more in encouraging a brisk circulation of trade for the
sake of the trade itself, or better understood all the my-
steries and refinements of it, than she did; so that she
was consummately at the top of her profession, and dealt
only with customers of distinction: to answer the demands
of whom she kept a competent number of her daughters in
constant recruit (so she call'd those whom by her means,
and through her tuition and instructions, succeeded very
     This useful gentlewoman upon whose protection I now
threw myself, having her reasons of state, respecting Mr.
H . . ., for not appearing too much in the thing herself,
sent a friend of her's, on the day appointed for my removal,
to conduct me to my new lodgings at a brushmaker's in R***
street, Covent Garden, the very next door to her own house,
where she had no conveniences to lodge me herself: lodgings
that, by having been for several successions tenanted by 
ladies of pleasure, the landlord of them was familiarized 
to their ways; and provided the rent was duly paid, every
thing else was as easy and commodious as one could desire.
     The fifty guineas promis'd me by Mr. H . . ., at his
parting with me, having been duly paid me, all my cloaths
and moveables chested up, which were at least of two
hundred pound's value, I had them convey'd into a coach,
where I soon followed them, after taking a civil leave of
the landlord and his family, with whom I had never liv'd in
a degree of familiarity enough to regret the removal; but
still, the very circumstance of its being a removal drew
tears from me.  I left, too, a letter of thanks for Mr.
H . . ., from whom I concluded myself, as I really was,
     My maid I had discharged the day before, not only
because I had her of Mr. H . . ., but that I suspected her
of having some how or other been the occasion of his dis-
covering me, in revenge, perhaps, for my not having trusted
     We soon got to my lodgings, which, though not so hand-
somely furnish'd nor so showy as those I left, were to the
full as convenient, and at half price, though on the first
floor.  My trunks were safely landed, and stow'd in my 
apartments, where my neighbour, and now gouvernante, Mrs.
Cole, was ready with my landlord to receive me, to whom she
took care to set me out in the most favourable light, that
of one from whom there was the clearest reason to expect 
the regular payment of his rent: all the cardinal virtues
attributed to me would not have had half the weight of that
     I was now settled in lodgings of my own, abandon'd to
my own conduct, and turned loose upon the town, to sink or
swim, as I could manage with the current of it; and what
were the consequences, together with the number of adven-
tures which befell me in the exercise of my new profession,
will compose the matter of another letter: for surely it is
     If I have delay'd the sequel of my history, it has been
purely to allow myself a little breathing time not without
some hopes that, instead of pressing me to a continuation,
you would have acquitted me of the task of pursuing a con-
fession, in the course of which my self-esteem has so many
     I imagined, indeed, that you would have been cloy'd and
tired with uniformity of adventures and expressions, insep-
arable from a subject of this sort, whose bottom, or ground-
work being, in the nature of things, eternally one and the
same, whatever variety of forms and modes the situations are
susceptible of, there is no escaping a repetition of near
the same images, the same figures, the same expressions,
with this further inconvenience added to the disgust it cre-
ates, that the words JOYS, ARDOURS, TRANSPORTS, EXTASIES,
and the rest of those pathetic terms so congenial to, so
received in the PRACTICE OF PLEASURE, flatten and lose much
of their due spirit and energy by the frequency they indis-
pensably recur with, in a narrative of which that PRACTICE
professedly composes the whole basis.  I must therefore
trust to the candour of your judgement, for your allowing
for the disadvantage I am necessarily under in that respect,
and to your imagination and sensibility, the pleasing task
of repairing it by their supplements, where my descriptions
flag or fail: the one will readily place the pictures I
present before your eyes; the other give life to the colours
where they are dull, or worn with too frequent handling.
     What you say besides, by way of encouragement, con-
cerning the extreme difficulty of continuing so long in one
strain, in a mean temper'd with taste, between the revolt-
ingness of gross, rank and vulgar expressions, and the ridi-
cule of mincing metaphors and affected circumlocutions, is
so sensible, as well as good-natur'd, that you greatly
justify me to myself for my compliance with a curiosity that
     Resuming now where I broke off in my last, I am in my
way to remark to you that it was late in the evening before
I arriv'd at my new lodgings, and Mrs. Cole, after helping
me to range and secure my things, spent the whole evening
with me in my apartment, where we supped together, in giving
me the best advice and instruction with regard to this new
stage of my profession I was now to enter upon; and passing
thus from a private devotee to pleasure into a public one,
to become a more general good, with all the advantages re-
quisite to put my person out to use, either for interest or
pleasure, or both.  But then, she observ'd, as I was a kind
of new face upon the town, that it was an established rule,
and part of trade, for me to pass for a maid, and dispose of
myself as such on the first good occasion, without prejudice,
however, to such diversions as I might have a mind to in the
interim; for that nobody could be a greater enemy than she
was to the losing of time.  That she would, in the mean time,
do her best to find out a proper person, and would undertake
to manage this nice point for me, if I would accept of her
aid and advice to such good purpose that, in the loss of a
fictitious maidenhead, I should reap all the advantages of a
     Though such a delicacy of sentiments did not extremely
belong to my character at that time, I confess, against my-
self, that I perhaps too readily closed with a proposal which
my candor and ingenuity gave me some repugnance to: but not
enough to contradict the intention of one to whom I had now
thoroughly abandoned the direction of all my steps.  For Mrs.
Cole had, I do not know how unless by one of those unaccount-
able invincible sympathies that, nevertheless, form the
strongest links, especially of female friendship, won and
got entire possession of me.  On her side, she pretended
that a strict resemblance she fancied she saw in me to an
only daughter whom she had lost at my age, was the first
motive of her taking to me so affectionately as she did.  It
might be so: there exist as slender motives of attachment
that, gathering force from habit and liking, have proved
often more solid and durable than those founded on much
stronger reasons; but this I know, that tho' I had no other
acquaintance with her than seeing her at my lodgings when I
lived with Mr. H . . ., where she had made errands to sell
me some millinery ware, she had by degrees insinuated her-
self so far into my confidence that I threw myself blindly
into her hands, and came, at length, to regard, love, and
obey her implicitly; and, to do her justice, I never experi-
enc'd at her hands other than a sincerity of tenderness, and
care for my interest, hardly heard of in those of her pro-
fession.  We parted that night, after having settled a per-
fect unreserv'd agreement; and the next morning Mrs. Cole
came, and took me with her to her house for the first time.
     Here, at the first sight of things, I found everything
     In the outer parlour, or rather shop, sat three young
women, very demurely employ'd on millinery work, which was
the cover of a traffic in more precious commodities; but
three beautifuller creatures could hardly be seen.  Two of
them were extremely fair, the eldest not above nineteen; 
and the third, much about that age, was a piquant brunette,
whose black sparkling eyes, and perfect harmony of features
and shape, left her nothing to envy in her fairer companions.
Their dress too had the more design in it, the less it ap-
peared to have, being in a taste of uniform correct neatness,
and elegant simplicity.  These were the girls that compos'd
the small domestick flock, which my governess train'd up with
surprising order and management, considering the giddy wild-
ness of young girls once got upon the loose.  But then she
never continued any in her house, whom, after a due novitiate,
she found untractable, or unwilling to comply with the rules
of it.  Thus had she insensibly formed a little family of
love, in which the members found so sensibly their account,
in a rare alliance of pleasure with interest, and of a
necessary outward decency with unbounded secret liberty,
that Mrs. Cole, who had pick'd them as much for their temper
as their beauty, govern'd them with ease to herself and them
     To these pupils then of hers, whom she had prepar'd,
she presented me as a new boarder, and one that was to be
immediately admitted to all the intimacies of the house; upon
which these charming girls gave me all the marks of a welcome
reception, and indeed of being perfectly pleased with my
figure, that I could possibly expect from any of my own sex:
but they had been effectually brought to sacrifice all jeal-
ousy, or competition of charms, to a common interest, and
consider'd me a partner that was bringing no despicable stock
of goods into the trade of the house.  They gathered round
me, view'd me on all sides; and as my admission into this
joyous troop made a little holiday, the shew of work was
laid aside; and Mrs. Cole giving me up, with special recom-
mendation, to their caresses and entertainment, went about
     The sameness of our sex, age, profession, and views
soon created as unreserv'd a freedom and intimacy as if we
had been for years acquainted.  They took and shew'd me the
house, their respective apartments, which were furnished 
with every article of conveniency and luxury; and above all,
a spacious drawing-room, where a select revelling band usu-
ally met, in general parties of pleasure; the girls supping
with their sparks, and acting their wanton pranks with un-
bounded licentiousness; whilst a defiance of awe, modesty or
jealousy were their standing rules, by which, according to 
the principles of their society, whatever pleasure was lost
on the side of sentiment was abundantly made up to the
senses in the poignancy of variety, and the charms of ease
and luxury.  The authors and supporters of this secret in-
stitution would, in the height of their humours style them-
selves the restorers of the golden age and its simplicity
of pleasures, before their innocence became so injustly 
     As soon then as the evening began, and the shew of a
shop was shut, the academy open'd; the mask of mock-modesty
was completely taken off, and all the girls deliver'd over
to their respective calls of pleasure or interest with
their men; and none of that sex was promiscuously admitted,
but only such as Mrs. Cole was previously satisfied with
their character and discretion.  In short, this was the
safest, politest, and, at the same time, the most thorough
house of accommodation in town: every thing being conducted
so that decency made no intrenchment upon the most libertine
pleasures, in the practice of which too, the choice familiars
of the house had found the secret so rare and difficult, of
reconciling even all the refinements of taste and delicacy 
with the most gross and determinate gratifications of senu-
     After having consum'd the morning in the endearments
and instructions of my new acquaintance, we went to dinner,
when Mrs. Cole, presiding at the head of her club, gave me
the first idea of her management and address, in inspiring
these girls with so sensible a love and respect for her.
There was no stiffness, no reserve, no airs of pique, or
little jealousies, but all was unaffectedly gay, cheerful 
     After dinner, Mrs. Cole, seconded by the young ladies,
acquainted me that there was a chapter to be held that night
in form, for the ceremony of my reception into the sister-
hood; and in which, with all due reserve to my maidenhead,
that was to be occasionally cook'd up for the first proper
chapman, I was to undergo a ceremonial of initiation they
     Embark'd as I was, and moreover captivated with the
charms of my new companions, I was too much prejudic'd in
favour of any proposal they could make, to much as hesitate
an assent; which, therefore, readily giving in the style of
a carte blanche, I receiv'd fresh kisses of compliment from
them all, in approval of my docility and good nature.  Now
I was "a sweet girl . . ."  I came into things with a "good
grace . . ."  I was not "affectedly coy . . ."  I should be
     This point thus adjusted, the young women left Mrs.
Cole to talk and concert matters with me: she explained to
me that I should be introduc'd, that very evening, to four
of her best friends, one of whom she had, according to the
custom of the house, favoured with the preference of engag-
ing me in the first party of pleasure; assuring me, at the
same time, that they were all young gentlemen agreeable in
their persons, and unexceptionable in every respect; that
united, and holding together by the band of common pleasures,
they composed the chief support of her house, and made very
liberal presents to the girls that pleas'd and humour'd
them, so that they were, properly speaking, the founders
and patrons of this little seraglio.  Not but that she had,
at proper seasons, other customers to deal with, whom she
stood less upon punctilio with than with these; for instance,
it was not on one of them she could attempt to pass me for
a maid; they were not only too knowing, too much town-bred
to bite at such a bait, but they were such generous bene-
factors to her that it would be unpardonable to think of it.
     Amidst all the flutter and emotion which this promise
of pleasure, for such I conceiv'd it, stirr'd up in me, I
preserved so much of the woman as to feign just reluctance
enough to make some merit of sacrificing it to the influence
of my patroness, whom I likewise, still in character, re-
minded of it perhaps being right for me to go home and dress,
     But Mrs. Cole, in opposition to this, assured me that 
the gentlemen I should be presented to were, by their rank
and taste of things, infinitely superior to the being touched
with any glare of dress or ornaments, such as silly women
rather confound and overlay than set off their beauty with;
that these veteran voluptuaries knew better than not to hold
them in the highest contempt: they with whom the pure native
charms alone could pass current, and who would at any time
leave a sallow, washy, painted duchess on her own hands, for
a ruddy, healthy, firm-flesh'd country maid; and as for my
part, that nature had done enough for me, to set me above 
owing the least favour to art; concluding withal, that for 
the instant occasion, there was no dress like an undress.    
     I thought my governess too good a judge of these matters
not to be easily over-ruled by her: after which she went on
preaching very pathetically the doctrine of passive obedience
and not-resistance to all those arbitrary tastes of pleasure,
which are by some styl'd the refinements, and by others the
depravations of it; between whom it was not the business of
a simple girl, who was to profit by pleasing, to decide, but
to conform to.  Whilst I was edifying by these wholesome
lessons, tea was brought in, and the young ladies, returning,
     After a great deal of mix'd chat, frolic and humour,
one of them, observing that there would be a good deal of
time on hand before the assembly-hour, proposed that each
girl should entertain the company with that critical period
of her personal history in which she first exchanged the
maiden state for womanhood.  The proposal was approv'd, with
only one restriction of Mrs. Cole, that she, on account of
her age, and I, on account of my titular maidenhead, should
be excused, at least till I had undergone the forms of the
house.  This obtain'd me a dispensation, and the promotress
     Her name was Emily; a girl fair to excess, and whose 
limbs were, if possible, too well made, since their plump
fullness was rather to the prejudice of that delicate slimness
requir'd by the nicer judges of beauty; her eyes were blue,
and streamed inexpressible sweetness, and nothing could be
prettier than her mouth and lips, which clos'd over a range
of the evenest and whitest teeth.  Thus she began:
     "Neither my extraction, nor the most critical adventure
of my life, is sublime enough to impeach me of any vanity in
the advancement of the proposal you have approv'd of.  My
father and mother were, and for aught I know, are still,
farmers in the country, not above forty miles from town:
their barbarity to me, in favour of a son, on whom only they
vouchsafed to bestow their tenderness, had a thousand times
determined me to fly their house, and throw myself on the
wide world; but, at length, an accident forc'd me on this
desperate attempt at the age of fifteen.  I had broken a
china bowl, the pride and idol of both their hearts; and as
an unmerciful beating was the least I had to depend on at
their hands, in the silliness of those tender years I left
the house, and, at all adventures, took the road to London.
How my loss was resented I do not know, for till this instant
I have not heard a syllable about them.  My whole stock was
too broad pieces of my grandmother's, a few shillings, silver
shoe-buckles and a silver thimble.  Thus equipp'd, with no
more cloaths than the ordinary ones I had on my back, and
frighten'd at every foot or noise I heard behind me, I
hurried on; and I dare swear, walked a dozen miles before I
stopped, through mere weariness and fatigue.  At length I
sat down on a stile, wept bitterly, and yet was still rather
under increased impressions of fear on the account of my
escape; which made dread, worse than death, the going back
to face my unnatural parents.  Refresh'd by this little
repose, and relieved by my tears, I was proceeding onward,
when I was overtaken by a sturdy country lad who was going to
London to see what he could do for himself there, and, like
me, had given his friends the slip.  He could not be above
seventeen, was ruddy, well featur'd enough, with uncombed
flaxen hair, a little flapp'd hat, kersey frock, yarn stock-
ings, in short, a perfect plough-boy.  I saw him come whist-
ling behind me, with a bundle tied to the end of a stick,
his travelling equipage.  We walk'd by one another for some
time without speaking; at length we join'd company, and
agreed to keep together till we got to our journey's end.
What his designs or ideas were, I know not: the innocence of
     "As night drew on, it became us to look out for some
inn or shelter; to which perplexity another was added, and
that was, what we should say for ourselves, if we were
question'd.  After some puzzle, the young fellow started a 
proposal, which I thought the finest that could be; and
what was that? why, that we should pass for husband and wife:
I never once dream'd of consequences.  We came presently,
after having agreed on this notable expedient, to one of
those hedge-accommodations for foot passengers, at the door
do which stood an old crazy beldam, who seeing us trudge by,
invited us to lodge there.  Glad of any cover, we went in,
and my fellow traveller, taking all upon him, call'd for what
the house afforded, and we supped together as man and wife;
which, considering our figures and ages, could not have
passed on any one but such as any thing could pass on.  But
when bedtime came on, we had neither of us the courage to
contradict out first account of ourselves; and what was ex-
tremely pleasant, the young lad seem'd as perplex'd as I was,
how to evade lying together, which was so natural for the
state we had pretenced to.  Whilst we were in this quandary,
the landlady takes the candle and lights us to our apartment,
through a long yard, at the end of which it stood, separate
from the body of the house.  Thus we suffer'd ourselves to
be conducted, without saying a word in opposition to it; and 
there, in a wretched room, with a bed answerable, we were 
left to pass the night together, as a thing quite of course.
For my part, I was so incredibly innocent as not even then to
think much more harm of going to bed with the young man than
with one of our dairy-wenches; nor had he, perhaps, any other
notions than those of innocence, till such a fair occasion
     "Before either of us undressed, however, he put out
the candle; and the bitterness of the weather made it a kind
of necessity for me to go into bed: slipping then my cloaths
off, I crept under the bed-cloaths, where I found the young
stripling already nestled, and the touch of his warm flesh
rather pleas'd than alarm'd me.  I was indeed too much dis-
turbed with the novelty of my condition to be able to sleep;
but then I had not the least thought of harm.  But, oh! how
powerful are the instincts of nature! how little is there
wanting to set them in action!  The young man, sliding his
arm under my body, drew me gently towards him, as if to keep
himself and me warmer; and the heat I felt from joining our
breasts, kindled another that I had hitherto never felt, and
was, even then, a stranger to the nature of.  Emboldened, I
suppose, by my easiness, he ventur'd to kiss me, and I insen-
sibly returned it, without knowing the consequence of return-
ing it; for, on this encouragement, he slipped his hand all
down from my breast to that part of me where the sense of
feeling is so exquisitely critical, as I then experienc'd by
its instant taking fire upon the touch, and glowing with a
strange tickling heat: there he pleas'd himself and me, by
feeling, till, growing a little too bold, he hurt me, and
made me complain.  Then he took my hand, which he guided,
not unwillingly on my side, between the twist of his closed
thighs, which were extremely warm; there he lodged and
pressed it, till raising it by degrees, he made me feel the
proud distinction of his sex from mine.  I was frighten'd
at the novelty, and drew back my hand; yet, pressed and
spurred on by sensations of a strange pleasure, I could not
help asking him what that was for?  He told me he would
show me if I would let him; and, without waiting for my
answer, which he prevented by stopping my mouth with kisses
I was far from disrelishing, he got upon me, and inserting
one of his thighs between mine, opened them so as to make
way for himself, and fixed me to his purpose; whilst I was
so much out of my usual sense, so subdu'd by the present
power of a new one, that, between fear and desire, I lay
utterly passive, till the piercing pain rous'd and made me
cry out.  But it was too late: he was too firm fix'd in the
saddle for me to compass flinging him, with all the strug-
gles I could use, some of which only served to further his
point, and at length an irresistible thrust murdered at once
my maidenhead, and almost me.  I now lay a bleeding witness
of the necessity impos'd on our sex, to gather the first
     "But the pleasure rising as the pain subsided, I was
soon reconciled to fresh trials, and before morning, nothing
on earth could be dearer to me than this rifler of my virgin
sweets: he was every thing to me now.  How we agreed to join
fortunes; how we came up to town together, where we lived
some time, till necessity parted us, and drove me into this
course of life, in which I had been long ago battered and
torn to pieces before I came to this age, as much through
my easiness, as through my inclination, had it not been for
my finding refuge in this house: these are all circumstances
which pass the mark I proposed, so that here my narrative
     In the order of our sitting, it was Harriet's turn to
go on.  Amongst all the beauties of our sex that I had be-
fore or have since seen, few indeed were the forms that
could dispute excellence with her's; it was not delicate,
but delicacy itself incarnate, such was the symmetry of her
small but exactly fashion'd limbs.  Her complexion, fair as
it was, appeared yet more fair from the effect of two black
eyes, the brilliancy of which gave her face more vivacity
than belonged to the colour of it, which was only defended
from paleness by a sweetly pleasing blush in her cheeks,
that grew fainter and fainter, till at length it died away
insensibly into the overbearing white.  Then her miniature
features join'd to finish the extreme sweetness of it,
which was not belied by that of temper turned to indolence,
languor, and the pleasures of love.  Press'd to subscribe
her contingent, she smiled, blushed a little, and thus
     "My father was neither better nor worse than a miller
near the city of York; and both he and my mother dying
whilst I was an infant, I fell under the care of a widow 
and childless aunt, housekeeper to my lord N . . ., at his
seat in the county of . . ., where she brought me up with
all imaginable tenderness.  I was not seventeen, as I am
not now eighteen, before I had, on account of my person
purely (for fortune I had notoriously none), several advan-
tageous proposals; but whether nature was slow in making me
sensible in her favourite passion, or that I had not seen
any of the other sex who had stirr'd up the least emotion
or curiosity to be better acquainted with it, I had, till
that age, preserv'd a perfect innocence, even of thought:
whilst my fears of I did not well know what, made me no
more desirous of marrying than of dying.  My aunt, good
woman, favoured my timorousness, which she look'd on as
childish affection, that her own experience might probably
assure her would wear off in time, and gave my suitors
     "The family had not been down at that seat for years,
so that it was neglected, and committed entirely to my aunt,
and two old domestics to take care of it.  Thus I had the
full range of a spacious lonely house and gardens, situate
at about half a mile distance form any other habitation, 
     "Here, in tranquillity and innocence, I grew up with-
out any memorable accident, till one fatal day I had, as I
had often done before, left my aunt fast asleep, and secure
for some hours, after dinner; and resorting to a kind of 
ancient summer-house, at some distance from the house, I 
carried my work with me, and sat over a rivulet, which its
door and window fac'd upon.  Here I fell into a gentle
breathing slumber, which stole upon my senses, as they
fainted under the excessive heat of the season at that hour;
a cane couch, with my work-basket for a pillow, were all
the conveniencies of my short repose; for I was soon awaked
and alarmed by a flounce, and the noise of splashing in the
water.  I got up to see what was the matter; and what indeed
should it be but the son of a neighbouring gentleman, as I
afterwards found (for I had never seen him before), who had
strayed that way with his gun, and heated by his sport, and 
the sultriness of the day, had been tempted by the freshness
of the clear stream; so that presently stripping, he jump'd
into it on the other side, which bordered on a wood, some
trees whereof, inclined down to the water, form'd a pleasing
shady recess, commodious to undress and leave his clothes
     "My first emotions at the sight of this youth, naked in
the water, were, with all imaginable respect to truth, those
of surprise and fear; and, in course, I should immediately
have run out, had not my modesty, fatally for itself, inter-
posed the objection of the door and window being so situated
that it was scarce possible to get out, and make my way
along the bank to the house, without his seeing me: which I
could not bear the thought of, so much ashamed and con-
founded was I at having seen him.  Condemn'd then to stay
till his departure should release me, I was greatly embar-
rassed how to dispose of myself:  I kept some time betwixt
terror and modesty, even from looking through the window,
which being an old-fashinon'd casement, without any light
behind me, could hardly betray any one's being there to
him from within; then the door was so secure, that without
violence, or my own consent, there was no opening it from
     "But now, by my own experience, I found it too true
that objects which affright us, when we cannot get from
them, draw out eyes as forcibly as those that please us.
I could not long withstand that nameless impulse, which,
without any desire of this novel sight, compelled me to-
wards it; embolden'd too by my certainty of being at once
unseen and safe, I ventur'd by degrees to cast my eyes on an
object so terrible and alarming to my virgin modesty as a
naked man.  But as I snatched a look, the first gleam that
struck me was in general the dewy lustre of the whitest skin
imaginable, which the sun playing upon made the reflection
of it perfectly beamy.  His face, in the confusion I was in,
I could not well distinguish the lineaments of, any farther
than that there was a great deal of youth and freshness in
it.  The frolic and various play of all his polish'd limbs,
as they appeared above the surface, in the course of his
swimming or wantoning with the water, amus'd and insensibly
delighted me: sometimes he lay motionless, on his back,
waterborne, and dragging after him a fine head of hair,
that, floating, swept the stream in a bush of black curls.
Then the over-flowing water would make a separation between
his breast and glossy white belly; at the bottom of which I
could not escape observing so remarkable a distinction as a
black mossy tuft, out of which appeared to emerge a round,
softish, limber, white something, that played every way,
with ever the least motion or whirling eddy.  I cannot say
but that part chiefly, by a kind of natural instinct,
attracted, detain'd, captivated my attention: it was out of
the power of all my modesty to command my eye away from it;
and seeing nothing so very dreadful in its appearance, I
insensibly lock'd away all my fears: but as fast as they
gave way, new desires and strange wishes took place, and I
melted as I gazed.  The fire of nature, that had so long
lain dormant or conceal'd, began to break out, and made me
feel my sex the first time.  He had now changed his pos-
ture, and swam prone on his belly, striking out with his
legs and arms, finer modell'd than which could not have
been cast, whilst his floating locks played over a neck and
shoulders whose whiteness they delightfully set off.  Then
the luxuriant swell of flesh that rose form the small of
his back, and terminated its double cope at where the
thighs are sent off, perfectly dazzled one with its watery
     "By this time I was so affected by this inward involu-
tion of sentiments, so soften'd by this sight, that now, 
betrayed into a sudden transition from extreme fears to ex-
treme desires, I found these last so strong upon me, the
heat of the weather too perhaps conspiring to exalt their 
rage, that nature almost fainted under them.  Not that I so
much as knew precisely what was wanting to me: my only 
thought was that so sweet a creature as this youth seemed
to me could only make me happy; but then, the little like-
lihood there was of compassing an acquaintance with him, or
perhaps of ever seeing him again, dash'd my desires, and
turn'd them into torments.  I was still gazing, with all
the powers of my sight, on this bewitching object, when, in
an instant, down he went.  I had heard of such things as a
cramp seizing on even the best swimmers, and occasioning
their being drowned; and imagining this so sudden eclipse
to be owing to it, the inconceivable fondness this unknown
lad had given birth to distracted me with the most killing
terrors; insomuch, that my concern giving the wings, I flew
to the door, open'd it, ran down to the canal, guided
thither by the madness of my fears for him, and the intense
desire of being an instrument to save him, though I was
ignorant how, or by what means to effect it: but was it for
fears, and a passion so sudden as mine, to reason? All this
took up scarce the space of a few moments.  I had then just
life enough to reach the green borders of the waterpiece,
where wildly looking round for the young man, and missing
him still, my fright and concern sunk me down in a deep
swoon, which must have lasted me some time; for I did not
come to myself till I was rous'd out of it by a  sense of
pain that pierced me to the vitals, and awaked me to the
most surprising circumstance of finding myself not only in
the arms of this very same young gentleman I had been so
solicitous to save, but taken at such an advantage in my
unresisting condition that he had actually completed his
entrance into me so far, that weakened as I was by all the
preceding conflicts of mind I had suffer'd, and struck dumb
by the violence of my surprise, I had neither the power to
cry out nor the strength to disengage myself from his stren-
uous embraces, before, urging his point, he had forced his
way and completely triumphed over my virginity, as he might
now as well see by the streams of blood that follow'd his
drawing out, as he had felt by the difficulties he had met
with consummating his penetration.  But the sight of the
blood, and the sense of my condition, had (as he told me
afterwards), since the ungovernable rage of his passion was
somewhat appeas'd, now wrought so far on him that at all
risks, even of the worst consequences, he could not find in
his heart to leave me, and make off, which he might easily
have done.  I still lay all descompos'd in bleeding ruin,
palpitating, speechless, unable to get off, and frightened,
and fluttering like a poor wounded partridge, and ready to
faint away again at the sense of what had befallen me.  The
young gentleman was by me, kneeling, kissing my hand, and
with tears in his eyes beseeching me to forgive him, and
offering all the reparation in his power.  It is certain
that could I, at the instant of regaining my senses, have
called out, or taken the bloodiest revenge, I would not have
stuck at it: the violation was attended too with such aggra-
vating circumstances, though he was ignorant of them, since
it was to my concern for the preservation of his life that I
     "But how quick is the shift of passions from one extreme
to another! and how little are they acquainted with the human
heart who dispute it!  I could not see this amiable criminal,
so suddenly the first object of my love, and as suddenly of
my just hate, on his knees, bedewing my hand with his tears,
without relenting.  He was still stark-naked, but my modesty
had been already too much wounded, in essentials, to be so
much shocked as I should have otherwise been with appearances
only; in short, my anger ebbed so fast, and the tide of love
return'd so strong upon me, that I felt it a point of my own
happiness to forgive him.  The reproaches I made him were
murmur'd in so soft a tone, my eyes met his with such glances,
expressing more languor than resentment, that he could not
but presume his forgiveness was at no desperate distance;
but still he would not quit his posture of submission, till
I had pronounced his pardon in form; which after the most
fervent entreaties, protestations, and promises, I had not
the power to withhold.  On which, with the utmost marks of a
fear of again offending, he ventured to kiss my lips, which
I neither declined nor resented; but on my mild expostula-
tions with him upon the barbarity of his treatment, he
explain'd the mystery of my ruin, if not entirely to the
clearance, at least much to the alleviation of his guilt, in
the eyes of a judge so partial in his favour as I was grown.
     "Its seems that the circumstance of his going down, or
sinking, which in my extreme ignorance I had mistaken for
something very fatal, was no other than a trick of diving
which I had not ever heard, or at least attended to, the
mention of: and he was so long-breath'd at it, that in the
few moments in which I ran out to save him, he had not yet
emerged, before I fell into the swoon, in which, as he rose,
seeing me extended on the bank, his first idea was that some
young woman was upon some design of frolic or diversion with
him, for he knew I could not have fallen a-sleep there with-
out his having seen me before: agreeably to which notion he
had ventured to approach, and finding me without sign of life,
and still perplex'd as he was what to think of the adventure,
he took me in his arms at all hazards, and carried me into
the summer-house, of which he observed the door open: there
he laid me down on the couch, and tried, as he protested in
good faith, by several means to bring me to myself again,
till fired, as he said, beyond all bearing by the sight and
touch of several parts of me which were unguardedly exposed
to him, he could no longer govern his passion; and the less,
as he was not quite sure that his first idea of this swoon
being a feint was not the very truth of the case: seduced
then by this flattering notion, and overcome by the present,
as he styled them, superhuman temptations, combined with the
solitude and seeming security of the attempt, he was not
enough his own master not to make it.  Leaving me then just
only whilst he fastened the door, he returned with redoubled
eagerness to his prey: when, finding me still entranced, he
ventured to place me as he pleased, whilst I felt, no more
than the dead, what he was about, till the pain he put me to
roused me just in time enough to be witness of a triumph I
was not able to defeat, and now scarce regretted: for as he
talked, the tone of his voice sounded, methought, so sweetly
in my ears, the sensible nearness of so new and interesting
an object to me wrought so powerfully upon me, that, in the
rising perception of things in a new and pleasing light, I
lost all sense of the past injury.  The young gentleman soon
discern'd the symptoms of a reconciliation in my softened
looks, and hastening to receive the seal of it from my lips,
press'd them tenderly to pass his pardon in the return of a
kiss so melting fiery, that the impression of it being car-
ried to my heart, and thence to my new-discover'd sphere of
Venus, I was melted into a softness that could refuse him
nothing.  When now he managed his caresses and endearments
so artfully as to insinuate the most soothing consolations
for the past pain and the most pleasing expectations of
future pleasure, but whilst mere modesty kept my eyes from
seeing his and rather declined them,  I had a glimpse of
that instrument of the mischief which was now, obviously
even to me, who had scarce had snatches of a comparative
observation of it, resuming its capacity to renew it, and
grew greatly alarming with its increase of size, as he bore
it no doubt designedly, hard and stiff against one of my
hands carelessly dropt; but then he employ'd such tender
prefacing, such winning progressions, that my returning
passion of desire being now so strongly prompted by the
engaging circumstances of the sight and incendiary touch of
his naked glowing beauties, I yielded at length at the
force of the present impressions, and he obtained of my
tacit blushing consent all the gratifications of pleasure
left in the power of my poor person to bestow, after he had
cropt its richest flower, during my suspension of life and
     "Here, according to the rule laid down, I should stop;
but I am so much in motion, that I could not if I would.  I
shall only add, however, that I got home without the least
discovery, or suspicion of what had happened.  I met my
young ravisher several times after, whom I now passionately
lov'd and who, tho' not of age to claim a small but indepen-
dent fortune, would have married me; but as the accidents
that prevented it, and their consequences which threw me on
the publick, contain matters too moving and serious to in-
     Louisa, the brunette whom I mentioned at first, now
took her turn to treat the company with her history.  I have
already hinted to you the graces of her person, than which
nothing could be more exquisitely touching; I repeat touch-
ing, as a just distinction from striking, which is ever a
less lasting effect, and more generally belongs to the fair
complexions: but leaving that decision to every one's taste,
I proceed to give you Louisa's narrative as follows:
     "According to practical maxims of life, I ought to
boast of my birth, since I owe it to pure love, without
marriage; but this I know, it was scarce possible to inherit
a stronger propensity to that cause of my being than I did.
I was the rare production of the first essay of a journeyman
cabinet-maker on his master's maid: the consequence of which
was a big belly, and the loss of a place.  He was not in
circumstances to do much for her; and yet, after all this
blemish, she found means, after she had dropt her burthen
and disposed of me to a poor relation's in the country, to
repair it by marrying a pastry-cook here in London, in
thriving business; on whom she soon, under favour of the
complete ascendant he had given her over him, passed me for
a child she had by her first husband.  I had, on that foot-
ing, been taken home, and was not six years old when this
step-father died and left my mother in tolerable circum-
stances, and without any children by him.  As to my natural
father, he had betaken himself to the sea; where, when the
truth of things came out, I was told that he died, not
immensely rich you may think, since he was no more than a
common sailor.  As I grew up, under the eyes of my mother,
who kept on the business, I could not but see, in her
severe watchfulness, the marks of a slip which she did not
care should be hereditary, but we no more choose our pas-
sions than our features or complexion, and the bent of
mine was so strong to the forbidden pleasure, that it got
the better, at length, of all her care and precaution.  I
was scarce twelve years old before that part which she
wanted so much to keep out of harm's way made me feel its
impatience to be taken notice of, and come into play: al-
ready had it put forth the signs of forwardness in the
sprout of a soft down over it, which had often flatter'd,
and I might also say, grown under my constant touch and
visitation, so pleas'd was I with what I took to be a kind
of title to womanhood, that state I pin'd to be entr'd of,
for the pleasures I conceiv'd were annexed to it; and now
the growing importance of that part to me, and the new sen-
sations in it, demolish'd at once all my girlish playthings
and amusements.  Nature now pointed me strongly to more
solid diversions, while all the stings of desire settled so
fiercely in that little centre of them, that I could not
     "I now shunn'd all company in which there was no hopes
of coming at the object of my longings, and used to shut
myself up, to indulge in solitude some tender meditation on
the pleasures I strongly perceiv'd the overture of, in feel-
ing and examining what nature assur'd me must be the chosen
avenue, the gates for unknown bliss to enter at, that I 
     "But these meditations only increas'd my disorder, and
blew the fire that consumed me.  I was yet worse when, yield-
ing at length to the insupportable irritations of the little 
fairy charm that tormented me, I seiz'd it with my fingers,
teasing it to no end.  Sometimes, in the furious excitations
of desire, I threw myself on the bed, spread my thighs
abroad, and lay as it were expecting the longed-for relief,
till finding my illusion, I shut and squeez'd them together
again, burning and fretting.  In short, this dev'lish thing,
with its impetuous girds and itching fires, led me such a
life that I could neither night nor day be at peace with it
or myself.  In time, however, I thought I had gained a pro-
digious prize, when figuring to myself that my fingers were
something of the shape of what I pined for, I worked my way
in for one of them with great agitation and delight; yet
not without pain too did I deflower myself as far as it
could reach; proceeding with such a fury of passion, in
this solitary and last shift of pleasure, as extended me at
length breathless on the bed in an amorous melting trance.
     "But frequency of use dulling the sensation, I soon
began to perceive that this work was but a paltry shallow
expedient that went but a little way to relieve me, and
rather rais'd more flame than its dry and insignificant
     "Man alone, I almost instinctively knew, as well as by 
what I had industriously picked up at weddings and christen-
ings, was possess'd of the only remedy that could reduce this
rebellious disorder; but watch'd and overlook'd as I was, how
to come at it was the point, and that, to all appearance, an
invincible one; not that I did not rack my brains and inven-
tion how at once to elude my mother's vigilance, and procure
myself the satisfaction of my impetuous curiosity and long-
ings for this mighty and untasted pleasure.  At length, how-
ever, a singular chance did at once the work of a long course
of alertness.  One day that we had dined at an acquaintance's
over the way, together with a gentlewoman-lodger that occu-
pied the first floor of our house, there started an indis-
pensable necessity for my mother's going down to Greenwich
to accompany her: the party was settled, when I do not know
what genius whispered me to plead a headache, which I cer-
tainly had not, against my being included in a jaunt that I
had not the least relish for.  The pretext however passed,
and my mother, with much reluctance, prevailed with herself
to go without me; but took particular care to see me safe
home, where she consign'd me into the hands of an old
trusty maid-servant, who served in the shop, for we had not
     "As soon as she was gone, I told the maid I would go up
and lie down on our lodger's bed, mine not being made, with
a charge to her at the same time not to disturb me, as it
was only rest I wanted.  This injunction probably prov'd of
eminent service to me.  As soon as I was got into the bed-
chamber, I unlaced my stays, and threw myself on the outside
of the bed-cloaths, in all the loosest undress.  Here I gave
myself up to the old insipid privy shifts of my self-viewing,
self-touching, self-enjoying, in fine, to all the means of
self-knowledge I could devise, in search of the pleasure that
fled before me, and tantalized with that unknown something
that was out of my reach; thus all only serv'd to enflame
myself, and to provoke violently my desires, whilst the one
thing needful to their satisfaction was not at hand, and I
could have bit my fingers, for representing it so ill.  After
then wearying and fatiguing myself with grasping shadows,
whilst that most sensible part of me disdain'd to content
itself with less than realities, the strong yearnings, the
urgent struggles of nature towards the melting relief, and
the extreme self-agitations I had used to come at it, had
wearied and thrown me into a kind of unquiet sleep: for, if
I tossed and threw about my limbs in proportion to the dis-
traction of my dreams, as I had reason to believe I did, a
bystander could not have help'd seeing all for love.  And
one there was it seems; for waking out of my very short
slumber, I found my hand lock'd in that of a young man, who
was kneeling at my bed-side, and begging my pardon for his
boldness: but that being a son to the lady to whom this bed-
chamber, he knew, belonged, he had slipp'd by the servant of
the shop, as he supposed, unperceiv'd, when finding me asleep,
his first ideas were to withdraw; but that he had been fix'd
and detain'd there by a power he could better account for
     "What shall I say? my emotions of fear and surprize
were instantly subdued by those of the pleasure I bespoke
in great presence of mind from the turn this adventure might
take.  He seem'd to me no other than a pitying angel, dropt
out of the clouds: for he was young and perfectly handsome,
which was more than even I had asked for; man, in general,
being all that my utmost desires had pointed at.  I thought
then I could not put too much encouragement into my eyes and
voice; I regretted no leading advances; no matter for his
after-opinion of my forwardness, so it might bring him to 
the point of answering my pressing demands of present case;
it was not now with his thoughts, but his actions, that my
business immediately lay.  I rais'd then my head, and told
him, in a soft tone that tended to prescribe the same key to
him, that his mamma was gone out and would not return till
late at night: which I thought no bad hint; but as it prov'd,
I had nothing of a novice to deal with.  The impressions I 
had made on him from the discoveries I had betrayed of my 
person in the disordered motions of it, during his view of 
me asleep, had, as he afterwards told me, so fix'd and charm-
ingly prepar'd him, that, had I known his dispositions, I
had more to hope from his violence than to fear from his
respect; and even less than the extreme tenderness which I 
threw into my voice and eyes, would have served to encourage
him to make the most of the opportunity.  Finding then that
his kisses, imprinted on my hand, were taken as tamely as he
could wish, he rose to my lips; and glewing his to them, made
me so faint with over-coming joy and pleasure that I fell
back, and he with me, in course, on the bed, upon which I
had, by insensibly shifting from the side to near the middle,
invitingly made room for him.  He is now lain down by me,
and the minutes being too precious to consume in untimely
ceremony, or dalliance, my youth proceeds immediately to
those extremities, which all my looks, flushing and palpi-
tations had assured him he might attempt without the fear of
repulse: those rogues, the men, read us admirably on these
occasions.  I lay then at length panting for the imminent
attack, with wishes far beyond my fears, and for which it
was scarce possible for a girl, barely thirteen, but all and
well grown, to have better dispositions.  He threw up my
petticoat and shift, whilst my thighs were, by an instinct
of nature, unfolded to their best; and my desires had so
thoroughly destroy'd all modesty in me, that even their
being now naked and all laid open to him, was part of the
prelude that pleasure deepen'd my blushes at, more than
shame.  But when his hand, and touches, naturally attracted
to their centre, made me feel all their wantonness and
warmth in, and round it, oh! how immensely different a
sense of things did I perceive there, than when under my
own insipid handling!  And now his waistcoat was unbuttoned,
and the confinement of the breeches burst through, when out
started to view the amazing, pleasing object of all my
wishes, all my dreams, all my love, the king member indeed!
I gaz'd at, I devoured it, at length and breadth, with my
eyes intently directed to it, till his getting upon me, and
placing it between my thighs, took from me the enjoyment of
its sight, to give me a far more grateful one in its touch,
in that part where its touch is so exquisitely affecting.
Applying it then to the minute opening, for such at that age
it certainly was, I met with too much good will, I felt with
too great a rapture of pleasure the first insertion of it,
to heed much the pain that followed: I thought nothing too
dear to pay for this the richest treat of the senses; so
that, split up, torn, bleeding, mangled, I was still supe-
riorly pleas'd, and hugg'd the author of all this delicious
ruin.  But when, soon after, he made his second attack, sore
as every thing was, the smart was soon put away by the sove-
reign cordial; all my soft complainings were silenc'd, and
the pain melting fast away into pleasure.  I abandon'd myself
over to all its transports, and gave it the full possession
of my whole body and soul; for now all thought was at an end
with me; I lived but in what I felt only.  And who could
describe those feelings, those agitations, yet exalted by
the charm of their novelty and surprize? when that part of
me which had so long hunger'd for the dear morsel that now
so delightfully crammed it, forc'd all my vital sensations
to fix their home there, during the stay of my beloved guest;
who too soon paid me for his hearty welcome in a dissolvent,
richer far than that I have heard of some queen treating her
paramour with, in liquify'd pearl, and ravishingly pour'd
into me, where, now myself too much melted to give it a dry
reception, I hail'd it with the warmest confluence on my
side, amidst all those extatic raptures, not unfamiliar I
presume to this good company!  Thus, however, I arrived at
the very top of all my wishes, by an accident unexpected
indeed, but not so wonderful; for this young gentleman was
just arriv'd in town from college, and came familiarly to
his mother at her apartment, where he had once before been,
though by mere chance.  I had not seen him: so that we knew
one another by hear-say only; and finding me stretched on
his mother's bed, he readily concluded, from her descrip-
     "This affair had however no ruinous consequences, the
young gentleman escaping then, and many more times undis-
cover'd.  But the warmth of my constitution, that made the
pleasures of love a kind of necessary of life to me, having
betray'd me into indiscretions fatal to my private fortune,
I fell at length to the publick; from which, it is probable,
I might have met with the worst of ruin if my better fate
had not thrown me into this safe and agreeable refuge."
     Here Louisa ended; and these little histories having
brought the time for the girls to retire, and to prepare
for the revels of the evening, I staid with Mrs. Cole till
Emily came and told us the company was met, and waited for
     On the landing-place of the first pair of stairs, we
were met by a young gentleman, extremely well dress'd, and a
very pretty figure, to whom I was to be indebted for the 
first essay of the pleasures of the house.  He saluted me
with great gallantry, and handed me into the drawing room,
the floor of which was overspread with a Turkey carpet, and
all its furniture voluptuously adapted to every demand of
the most study'd luxury; now too it was, by means of a pro-
fuse illumination, enliven'd by a light scarce inferior, and
perhaps more favourable to joy, more tenderly pleasing, than
     On my entrance into the room, I had the satisfaction to
hear a buzz of approbation run through the whole company
which now consisted of four gentlemen, including my parti-
cular (this was the cant-term of the house for one's gallant
for the time), the three young women, in a neat flowing
dishabille, the mistress of the academy, and myself.  I was
welcomed and saluted by a kiss all round, in which, however,
it was easy to discover, in the superior warmth of that of
     Aw'd and confounded as I was at seeing myself sur-
rounded, caress'd, and made court to by so many strangers,
I could not immediately familiarize myself to all that air
of gaiety and joy which dictated their compliments, and
     They assur'd me that I was so perfectly to their taste
as to have but one fault against me, which I might easily be
cur'd of, and that was my modesty: this, they observ'd, might
pass for a beauty the more with those who wanted it for a
heightener; but their maxim was, that it was an impertinent
mixture, and dash'd the cup so as to spoil the sincere draught
of pleasure; they consider'd it accordingly as their mortal
enemy, and gave it no quarter wherever they met with it.
This was a prologue not unworthy of the revels that ensu'd.
     In the midst of all the frolic and wantonnesses, which
this joyous band had presently, and all naturally, run into,
an elegant supper was serv'd in, and we sat down to it, my
spark-elect placing himself next to me, and the other couples
without order or ceremony.  The delicate cheer and good wine
soon banish'd all reserve; the conversation grew as lively
as could be wished, without taking too loose a turn: these
professors of pleasure knew too well, to stale impressions
of it, or evaporate the imagination in words, before the time
of action.  Kisses however were snatch'd at times, or where a
handkerchief round the neck interpos'd its feeble barrier, it
was not extremely respected: the hands of the men went to
work with their usual petulance, till the provocations on
both sides rose to such a pitch that my particular's proposal
for beginning the country-dances was received with instant
assent: for, as he laughingly added, he fancied the instru-
ments were in tune.  This was a signal for preparation, that
the complaisant Mrs. Cole, who understood life, took for her
cue of disappearing; no longer so fit for personal service
herself, and content with having settled the order of battle,
she left us the field, to fight it out at discretion.
     As soon as she was gone, the table was remov'd form the
middle, and became a side-board; a couch was brought into 
its place, of which when I whisperingly inquired the reason,
of my particular, he told me that as it was chiefly on my
account that this convention was met, the parties intended 
at once to humour their taste of variety in pleasures, and
by an open publick enjoyment, to see me broke of any taint
of reserve or modesty, which they look'd on as the poison
of joy; that though they occasionally preached pleasure, 
and lived up to the text, they did not enthusiastically set
up for missionaries, and only indulg'd themselves in the
delights of a practical instruction of all the pretty women
they lik'd well enough to bestow it upon, and who fell pro-
perly in the way of it; but that as such a proposal might
be too violent, too shocking for a young beginner, the old
standers were to set an example, which he hoped I would not
be averse to follow, since it was to him I was devolv'd in
favour of the first experiment; but that still I was per-
fectly at my liberty to refuse the party, which being in its
nature one of pleasure, suppos'd an exclusion of all force
     My countenance expressed, no doubt, my surprise as my
silence did my acquiescence.  I was now embarked, and
thoroughly determined on any voyage the company would take
     The first that stood up, to open the ball, were a cor-
net of horse, and that sweetest of olive-beauties, the soft
and amorous Louisa.  He led her to the couch "nothing loth,"
on which he gave her the fall, and extended her at her
length with an air of roughness and vigour, relishing high
of amorous eagerness and impatience.  The girl, spreading
herself to the best advantage, with her head upon the pillow,
was so concentred in what she was about, that our presence
seemed the least of her care and concern.  Her petticoats,
thrown up with her shift, discovered to the company the
finest turn'd legs and thighs that could be imagined, and in
broad display, that gave us a full view of that delicious
cleft of flesh into which the pleasing hair-grown mount over
it, parted and presented a most inviting entrance between
two close-hedges, delicately soft and pouting.  Her gallant
was now ready, having disencumber'd himself from his cloaths,
overloaded with lace, and presently, his shirt removed, shew'd
us his forces in high plight, bandied and ready for action.
But giving us no time to consider the dimensions, he threw
himself instantly over his charming antagonist, who receiv'd
him as he pushed at once dead at mark like a heroine, without
flinching; for surely never was girl constitutionally truer 
to the taste of joy, or sincerer in the expressions of its 
sensations, than she was: we could observe pleasure lighten
in her eyes, as he introduc'd his plenipotentiary instrument
into her; till, at length, having indulg'd her to its utmost
reach, its irritations grew so violent, and gave her the
spurs so furiously, that collected within herself, and lost
to everything but the enjoyment of her favourite feelings,
she retorted his thrusts with a just concert of springy
heaves, keeping time so exactly with the most pathetic sighs,
that one might have number'd the strokes in agitation by
their distinct murmurs, whilst her active limbs kept wreath-
ing and intertwisting with his, in convulsive folds: then
the turtle-billing kisses, and the poignant painless love-
bites, which they both exchang'd in a rage of delight, all
conspiring towards the melting period.  It soon came on when
Louisa, in the ravings of her pleasure-frenzy, impotent of
all restraint, cried out:  "Oh Sir! . . . Good Sir! . . .
pray do not spare me! ah! ah! . . ."  All her accents now
faltering into heart-fetched sighs, she clos'd her eyes in
the sweet death, in the instant of which she was embalm'd by
an injection, of which we could easily see the signs in the
quiet, dying, languid posture of her late so furious driver,
who was stopp'd of a sudden, breathing short, panting, and,
for the time, giving up the spirit of pleasure.  As soon as
he was dismounted, Louisa sprung up, shook her petticoats,
and running up to me, gave me a kiss and drew me to the
side-board, to which she was herself handed by her gallant,
where they made me pledge them in a glass of wine, and toast
a droll health of Louisa's proposal in high frolic.
     By this time the second couple was ready to enter the
lists: which were a young baronet, and that delicatest of
charmers, the winning, tender Harriet.  My gentle esquire
came to acquaint me with it, and brought me back to the
     And, surely, never did one of her profession accompany 
her dispositions for the bare-faced part she was engaged to
play with such a peculiar grace of sweetness, modesty and
yielding coyness, as she did.  All her air and motions
breath'd only unreserv'd, unlimited complaisance without the
least mixture of impudence, or prostitution.  But what was
yet more surprising, her spark-elect, in the midst of the
dissolution of a publick open enjoyment, doted on her to dis-
traction, and had, by dint of love and sentiments, touched
her heart, tho' for a while the restraint of their engagement
to the house laid him under a kind of necessity of complying
with an institution which himself had had the greatest share
     Harriet was then led to the vacant couch by her gallant,
blushing as she look'd at me, and with eyes made to justify
any thing, tenderly bespeaking of me the most favourable
construction of the step she was thus irresistibly drawn
     Her lover, for such he was, sat her down at the foot of
the couch, and passing his arm round her neck, preluded with
a kiss fervently applied to her lips, that visibly gave her
life and spirit to go thro' with the scene; and as he kiss'd,
he gently inclined her head, till it fell back on a pillow
disposed to receive it, and leaning himself down  all the way
with her, at once countenanc'd and endear'd her fall to her.
There, as if he had guess'd our wishes, or meant to gratify
at once his pleasure and his pride, in being the master, by
the title of present possession, of beauties delicate beyond
imagination, he discovered her breasts to his own touch, and
our common view; but oh! what delicious manuals of love
devotion! how inimitable fine moulded! small, round, firm,
and excellently white: the grain of their skin, so soothing,
so flattering to the touch! and their nipples, that crown'd
them, the sweetest buds of beauty.  When he had feasted his
eyes with the touch and perusal, feasted his lips with kisses
of the highest relish, imprinted on those all-delicious twin
     Her legs still kept the ground; and now, with the ten-
derest attention not to shock or alarm her too suddenly, he,
by degrees, rather stole than rolled up her petticoats; at
which, as if a signal had been given, Louisa and Emily took
hold of her legs, in pure wantonness, and, in ease to her, 
kept them stretched wide abroad.  Then lay exposed, or, to
speak more properly, display'd the greatest parade in nature
of female charms.  The whole company, who, except myself,
had often seen them, seemed as much dazzled, surpriz'd and
delighted, as any one could be who had now beheld them for
the first time.  Beauties so excessive could not but enjoy
the privileges of eternal novelty.  Her thighs were so ex-
quisitely fashioned, that either more in, or more out of
flesh than they were, they would have declined from that 
point of perfection they presented.  But what infinitely
enrich'd and adorn'd them, was the sweet intersection formed,
where they met, at the bottom of the smoothest, roundest,
whitest belly, by that central furrow which nature had sunk
there, between, the soft relieve of two pouting ridges, and
which in this was in perfect symmetry of delicacy and minia-
ture with the rest of her frame.  No! nothing in nature could
be of a beautifuller cut; then, the dark umbrage of the downy
spring-moss that over-arched it bestowed, on the luxury of
the landscape, a touching warmth, a tender finishing, beyond
the expression of words, or even the paint of thought.
     Her truly enamour'd gallant, who had stood absorbed and
engrossed by the pleasure of the sight long enough to afford
us time to feast ours (no fear of glutting!) addressed him-
self at length to the materials of enjoyment, and lifting 
the linen veil that hung between us and his master member of
the revels, exhibited one whose eminent size proclaimed the
owner a true woman's hero.  He was, besides, in every other
respect an accomplish'd gentleman, and in the bloom and
vigour of youth.  Standing then between Harriet's legs, which
were supported by her two companions at their widest exten-
sion, with one hand he gently disclosed the lips of that
luscious mouth of nature, whilst with the other, he  stooped
his mighty machine to its lure, from the height of his stiff
stand-up towards his belly; the lips, kept open by his fin-
gers, received its broad shelving head of coral hue: and
when he had nestled it in, he hovered there a little, and
the girls then deliver'd over to his hips the agreeable
office of supporting her thighs; and now, as if meant to spin
out his pleasure, and give it the more play for its life, he
passed up his instrument so slow that we lost sight of it
inch by inch, till at length it was wholly taken into the
soft laboratory of love, and the mossy mounts of each fairly
met together.  In the mean time, we could plainly mark the
prodigious effect the progressions of this delightful energy
wrought in this delicious girl, gradually heightening her
beauty as they heightened her pleasure.  Her countenance and
whole frame grew more animated; the faint blush of her cheeks,
gaining ground on the white, deepened into a florid vivid
vermilion glow, her naturally brilliant eyes now sparkled
with ten-fold lustre; her languor was vanish'd, and she
appeared, quick spirited, and alive all over.  He now fixed,
nailed, this tender creature with his home-driven wedge, so
that she lay passive by force, and unable to stir, till
beginning to play a strain of arms against this vein of
delicacy, as he urged the to-and-fro confriction, he awaken'd,
rous'd, and touch'd her so to the heart, that unable to
contain herself, she could not but reply to his motions as
briskly as her nicety of frame would admit of, till the
raging stings of the pleasure rising towards the point, made
her wild with the intolerable sensations of it, and she now
threw her legs and arms about at random, as she lay lost in
the sweet transport; which on his side declared itself by
quicker, eager thrusts, convulsive gasps, burning sighs,
swift laborious breathings, eyes darting humid fires: all
faithful tokens of the imminent approaches of the last gasp
of joy.  It came on at length: the baronet led the extasy,
which she critically joined in, as she felt the melting
symptoms from him, in the nick of which glewing more ardently
than ever his lips to hers, he shewed all the signs of that 
agony of bliss being strong upon him, in which he gave her
the finishing titillation; inly thrill'd with which, we saw
plainly that she answered it down with all effusion of spirit
and matter she was mistress of, whilst a general soft shudder
ran through all her limbs, which she gave a stretch-out of, 
and lay motionless, breathless, dying with dear delight; and
in the height of its expression, shewing, through the nearly
closed lids of her eyes, just the edges of their black, the
rest being rolled strongly upwards in their extasy; then her
sweet mouth appear'd languishingly open, with the tip of her
tongue leaning negligently towards the lower range of her
white teeth, whilst the natural ruby colour of her lips
glowed with heightened life.  Was not this a subject to
dwell upon?  And accordingly her lover still kept on her,
with an abiding delectation, till compressed, squeezed and
distilled to the last drop, he took leave with one fervent
kiss, expressing satisfy'd desires, but unextinguish'd love.
     As soon as he was off, I ran to her, and sitting down
on the couch by her, rais'd her head, which she declin'd
gently, and hung on my bosom, to hide her blushes and con-
fusion at what had pass'd, till by degrees she recomposed
herself and accepted of a restorative glass of wine from my
spark, who had left me to fetch it her, whilst her own was
re-adjusting his affairs and buttoning up; after which he
led her, leaning languishingly upon him, to our stand of
     And now Emily's partner had taken her out for her
share in the dance, when this transcendently fair and sweet
tempered creature readily stood up; and if a complexion to
put the rose and lily out of countenance, extreme pretty
features, and that florid health and bloom for which the
country-girls are so lovely, might pass her for a beauty,
this she certainly was, and one ot the most striking of the
     Her gallant began first, as she stood, to disengage her
breasts, and restore them to the liberty of nature, from the
easy confinement of no more than a pair of jumps; but on
their coming out to view, we thought a new light was added
to the room, so superiourly shining was their whiteness;
then they rose in so happy a swell as to compose her a well-
formed fulness of bosom, that had such an effect on the eye
as to seem flesh hardening into marble, of which it emulated
the polished gloss, and far surpassed even the whitest, in
the life and lustre of its colours, white veined with blue.
Refrain who could from such provoking enticements to it in
reach?  He touched her breasts, first lightly, when the 
glossy smoothness of the skin eluded his hand, and made it
slip along the surface; he press'd them, and the springy 
flesh that filled them thus pitted by force, rose again
reboundingly with his hand, and on the instant effac'd the
pressure: and alike indeed was the consistence of all those
parts of her body throughout, where the fulness of flesh
compacts and constitutes all that fine firmness which the
touch is so highly attach'd to.  When he had thus largely
pleased himself with this branch of dalliance and delight,
he truss'd up her petticoat and shift in a wisp to her waist,
where being tuck'd in, she stood fairly naked on every side;
a blush at this overspread her lovely face, and her eyes down
cast to the ground seemed to be for quarter, when she had so
great a right to triumph in all the treasures of youth and
beauty that she now so victoriously display'd.  Her legs were
perfectly well shaped and her thighs, which she kept pretty
close, shewed so white, so round, so substantial and abound-
ing in firm flesh, that nothing could offer a stronger recom-
mendation to the luxury of the touch, which he accordingly 
did not fail to indulge himself in.  Then gently removing her
hand, which in the first emotion of natural modesty she had
carried thither, he gave us rather a glimpse than a view of
that soft narrow chink running its little length downwards
and hiding the remains of it between her thighs; but plain
was to be seen the fringe of light-brown curls, in beauteous
growth over it, that with their silky gloss created a pleas-
ing variety from the surrounding white, whose lustre too,
their gentle embrowning shade, considerably raised.  Her
spark then endeavoured, as she stood, by disclosing her
thighs, to gain us a completer sight of that central charm
of attraction, but not obtaining it so conveniently in that
attitude, he led her to the foot of the couch, and bringing
to it one of the pillows, gently inclin'd her head down, so
that as she leaned with it over her crossed hands, strad-
dling with her thighs wide spread, and jutting her body out,
she presented a full back view of her person, naked to the
waist.  Her posteriours, plump, smooth, and prominent,
form'd luxuriant tracts of animated snow, that splendidly
filled the eye, till it was commanded down the parting or
separation of those exquisitely white cliffs, by their
narrow vale, and was there stopt, and attracted by the em-
bowered bottom-cavity, that terminated this delightful
vista and stood moderately gaping from the influence of her
bended posture, so that the agreeable, interior red of the
sides of the orifice came into view, and with respect to 
the white that dazzled round it, gave somewhat the idea of
a pink slash in the glossiest white satin.  Her gallant, 
who was a gentleman about thirty, somewhat inclin'd to a
fatness that was in no sort displeasing, improving the hint
thus tendered him of this mode of enjoyment, after settling
her well in this posture, and encouraging her with kisses
and caresses to stand him through, drew out his affair ready 
erected, and whose extreme length, rather disproportion'd to
its breadth, was the more surprizing, as that excess is not
often the case with those of his corpulent habit; making 
then the right and direct application, he drove it up to the
guard, whilst the round bulge of those Turkish beauties of
her's tallying with the hollow made with the bent of his 
belly and thighs, as they curved inwards, brought all those
parts, surely not undelightfully, into warm touch, and close
conjunction; his hands he kept passing round her body, and 
employed in toying with her enchanting breasts.  As soon too
as she felt him at home as he could reach, she lifted her 
head a little from the pillow, and turning her neck, without
much straining, but her cheeks glowing with the deepest scar-
let, and a smile of the tenderest satisfaction, met the kiss
he press'd forward to give her as they were thus close joined
together: when leaving him to pursue his delights, she hid
again her face and blushes with her hands and pillow, and 
thus stood passively and as favourably too as she could,
whilst he kept laying at her with repeated thrusts and making
the meeting flesh on both sides resound again with the vio-
lence of them; then ever as he backen'd from her, we could
see between them part of his long whitestaff foamingly in 
motion, till, as he went on again and closed with her, the
interposing hillocks took it out of sight.  Sometimes he took
his hands from the semi-globes of her bosoms, and transferred
the pressure of them to those larger ones, the present sub-
jects of his soft blockade, which he squeez'd, grasp'd and
play'd with, till at length a pursuit of driving, so hotly
urged, brought on the height of the fit, with such overpower-
ing pleasure, that his fair partner became, now necessary to
support him, panting, fainting and dying as he discharged;
which she no sooner felt the killing sweetness of, than un-
able to keep her legs, and yielding to the mighty intoxica-
tion, she reeled, and falling forward on the couch, made it
a necessity for him, if he would preserve the warm pleasure-
hold, to fall upon her, where they perfected, in a continued
conjunction of body and extatic flow, their scheme of joys
     As soon as he had disengag'd, the charming Emily got up,
and we crowded round her with congratulations and other offi-
cious little services; for it is to be noted, that though all
modesty and reserve were banished from the transaction of
these pleasures, good manners and politeness were inviolably
observ'd: here was no gross ribaldry, no offensive or rude
behaviour, or ungenerous reproaches to the girls for their
compliance with the humours and desires of the men.  On the
contrary, nothing was wanting to soothe, encourage, and
soften the sense of their condition to them.  Men know not 
in general how much they destroy of their own pleasure, when
they break through the respect and tenderness due to our sex,
and even to those of it who live only by pleasing them.  And
this was a maxim perfectly well understood by these polite 
voluptuaries, these profound adepts in the great art and sci-
ence of pleasure, who never shew'd these votaries of theirs a
more tender respect than at the time of those exercises of
their complaisance, when they unlock'd their treasures of
concealed beauty, and shewed out in the pride of their native
charms, ever-more touching surely than when they paraded it 
     The frolick was now come round to me, and it being my
turn of subscription to the will and pleasure of my particu-
lar elect, as well as to that of the company, he came to me,
and saluting me very tenderly, with a flattering eagerness,
put me in mind of the compliances my presence there author-
iz'd the hopes of, and at the same time repeated to me that
if all this force of example had not surmounted any repug-
nance I might have to concur with the humours and desires of
the company, that though the play was bespoke for my benefit,
and great as his own private disappointment might be, he
would suffer any thing, sooner than be the instrument of im-
     To this I answered, without the least hesitation or
mincing grimace, that had I not even contracted a kind of
engagement to be at his disposal without the least reserve,
the example of such agreeable companions would alone deter-
mine me and that I was in no pain about any thing but my
appearing to so great a disadvantage after such superior
beauties.  And take notice that I thought as I spoke.  The
frankness of the answer pleas'd them all; my particular was
complimented on his acquisition, and, by way of indirect
     Mrs. Cole, by the way, could not have given me a greater
mark of her regard than in managing for me the choice of this
young gentleman for my master of the ceremonies: for, inde-
pendent of his noble birth and the great fortune he was heir
to, his person was even uncommonly pleasing, well shaped and
tall; his face mark'd with the small-pox, but no more than
what added a grace of more manliness to features rather turn-
ed to softness and delicacy, was marvellously enliven'd by
eyes which were of the clearest sparkling black; in short, he
was one whom any woman would, in the familiar style, readily
     I was now handed by him to the cock-pit of our match,
where, as I was dressed in nothing but a white morning gown,
he vouchsafed to play the male-Abigail on this occasion, and
spared me the confusion that would have attended the forward-
ness of undressing myself: my gown then was loosen'd in a
trice, and I divested of it; my stay next offered an obstacle
which readily gave way, Louisa very readily furnishing a pair
of scissors to cut the lace; off went that shell and dropping
my upper-coat, I was reduced to my under one and my shift,
the open bosom of which gave the hands and eyes all the lib-
erty they could wish.  Here I imagin'd the stripping was to
stop, but I reckoned short: my spark, at the desire of the
rest, tenderly begged that I would not suffer the small re-
mains of a covering to rob them of a full view of my whole
person; and for me, who was too flexibly obsequious to dis-
pute any point with them, and who considered the little more
that remain'd as very immaterial, I readily assented to what-
ever he pleased.  In an instant, then, my under-petticoat was
untied and at my feet, and my shift drawn over my head, so
that my cap, slightly fasten'd, came off with it, and brought
all my hair down (of which, be it again remembered without
vanity, that I had a very fine head) in loose disorderly ring-
lets, over my neck and shoulders, to the not unfavourable
     I now stood before my judges in all the truth of nature,
to whom I could not appear a very disagreeable figure, if you
please to recollect what I have before said of my person,
which time, that at certain periods of life robs us every 
instant of our charms, had, at that of mine, then greatly
improved into full and open bloom, for I wanted some months
of eighteen.  My breasts, which in the state of nudity are 
ever capital points, now in no more than in graceful pleni-
tude, maintained a firmness and steady independence of any 
stay or support that dared and invited the test of the touch.
Then I was as tall, as slim-shaped as could be consistent
with all that juicy plumpness of flesh, ever the most grate-
ful to the senses of sight and touch, which I owed to the 
health and youth of my constitution.  I had not, however, so
thoroughly renounc'd all innate shame as not to suffer great
confusion at the state I saw myself in; but the whole troop
round me, men and women, relieved me with every mark of ap-
plause and satisfaction, every flattering attention to raise
and inspire me with even sentiments of pride on the figure I
made, which, my friend gallantly protested, infinitely out-
shone all other birthday finery whatever; so that had I leave
to set down, for sincere, all the compliments these connois-
seurs overwhelmed me with upon this occasion, I might flatter
myself with having pass'd my examination with the approbation
     My friend however, who for this time had alone the dis-
posal of me, humoured their curiosity, and perhaps his own,
so far that he placed me in all the variety of postures and
lights imaginable, pointing out every beauty under every as-
pect of it, not without such parentheses of kisses, such in-
flammatory liberties of his roving hands, as made all shame
fly before them, and a blushing glow give place to a warmer
one of desire, which led me even to find some relish in the
     But in this general survey, you may be sure, the most
material spot of me was not excus'd the strictest visitation;
nor was it but agreed, that I had not the least reason to be
diffident of passing even for a maid, on occasion: so incon-
siderable a flaw had my preceding adventures created there,
and so soon had the blemish of an over-stretch been repaired
and worn out at my age, and in my naturally small make in 
     Now, whether my partner had exhausted all the modes of
regaling the touch or sight, or whether he was now ungovern-
ably wound up to strike, I know not; but briskly throwing off
his clothes, the prodigious heat bred by a close room, a
great fire, numerous candles, and even the inflammatory
warmth of these scenes, induced him to lay aside his shirt
too, when his breeches, before loosen'd, now gave up their
contents to view, and shew'd in front the enemy I had to en-
gage with, stiffly bearing up the port of its head unhooded,
and glowing red.  Then I plainly saw what I had to trust to:
it was one of those just true-siz'd instruments, of which
the masters have a better command than the more unwieldy,
inordinate siz'd ones are generally under.  Straining me
then close to his bosom, as he stood up fore-right against
me and applying to the obvious niche its peculiar idol, he
aimed at inserting it, which, as I forwardly favoured, he
effected at once by canting up my thighs over his naked hips,
and made me receive every inch, and close home; so that stuck
upon the pleasure-pivot, and clinging round his neck, in
which and in his hair I hid my face, burningly flushing with
my present feelings as much as with shame, my bosom glew'd to
his; he carried me once round the couch, on which he then,
without quitting the middle-fastness, or dischannelling, laid
me down, and began the pleasure-grist.  But so provokingly
predisposed and primed as we were, by all the moving sights
of the night, our imagination was too much heated not to melt
us of the soonest: and accordingly, I no sooner felt the warm
spray darted up my inwards from him, but I was punctually on
flow, to share the momentary extasy; but I had yet greater
reason to boast of out harmony: for finding that all the
flames of desire were not yet quench'd within me, but that
rather, like wetted coals, I glowed the fiercer for this
sprinkling, my hot-mettled spark, sympathizing with me, and
loaded for a double fire, recontinu'd the sweet battery with
undying vigour; greatly pleas'd at which I gratefully endea-
voured to accommodate all my motions to his best advantage
and delight; kisses, squeezes, tender murmurs, all came into
play, till our joys, growing more turbulent and riotous,
threw us into a fond disorder, and as they raged to a point,
bore us far from ourselves into an ocean of boundless plea-
sures, into which we both plunged together in a transport of
taste.  Now all the impressions of burning desire, from the
lively scenes I had been spectatress of, ripened by the heat
of this exercise, and collecting to a head, throbb'd and agi-
tated me with insupportable irritations: I did not now enjoy
a calm of reason enough to perceive, but I extatically, in-
deed, felt the power of such rare and exquisite provocatives,
as the examples of the night had proved towards thus exalting
our pleasures: which, with great joy, I sensibly found my
gallant shared in, by his nervous and home expressions of it:
his eyes flashing eloquent flames, his action infuriated with
the stings of it, all conspiring to rise my delight by assur-
ing me of his.  Lifted then to the utmost pitch of joy that
human life can bear,undestroyed by excess, I touch'd that
sweetly critical point, whence scarce prevented by the injec-
tion from my partner, I dissolved, and breaking out into a
deep drawn sigh, sent my whole sensitive soul down to that
passage where escape was denied it, by its being so delici-
ously plugged and chok'd up.  Thus we lay a few blissful in-
stants, overpowered, still, and languid; till, as the sense
of pleasure stagnated, we recover'd from out trance, and he
slipt out of me, not however before he had protested his ex-
treme satisfaction by the tenderest kiss and embrace, as well
     The company, who had stood round us in a profound
silence, when all was over, help'd me to hurry on my cloaths
in an instant, and complimented me on the sincere homage
they could not escape observing had been done (as they
termed it) to the sovereignty of my charms, in my receiving
a double payment of tribute at one juncture.  But my partner,
now dress'd again, signaliz'd, above all, a fondness unbated
by the circumstance of recent enjoyment; the girls too kiss'd
and embraced me, assuring me that for that time, or indeed
any other, unless I pleased, I was to go thro' no farther
publick trials, and that I was now consummatedly initiated,
     As it was an inviolable law for every gallant to keep to
his partner, for the night especially, and even till he
relinquish'd possession over to the community, in order to
preserve a pleasing property and to avoid the disgusts and
indelicacy of another arrangement, the company, after a short
refection of biscuits and wine, tea and chocolate, served in
at now about one in the morning, broke up, and went off in 
pairs.  Mrs. Cole had prepared my spark and me an occasional 
field-bed, to which we retir'd, and there ended the night in
one continued strain of pleasure, sprightly and uncloy'd 
enough for us not to have formed one wish for its ever knowing
an end.  In the morning, after a restorative breakfast in bed,
he got up, and with very tender assurances of a particular
regard for me, left me to the composure and refreshment of a 
sweet slumber; waking out of which, and getting up to dress
before Mrs. Cole should come in, I found in one of my pockets
a purse of guineas, which he had slipt there; and just as I
was musing on a liberality I had certainly not expected, Mrs.
Cole came in, to whom I immediately communicated the present,
and naturally offered her whatever share she pleas'd: but
assuring me that the gentleman had very nobly rewarded her,
she would on no terms, no entreaties, no shape I could put it
in, receive any part of it.  Her denial, she observed, was
not affectation of grimace, and proceeded to read me such 
admirable lessons on the economy of my person and my purse as
I became amply paid for my general attention and conformity 
to in the course of my acquaintance with the town.  After 
which, changing the discourse, she fell on the pleasures of
the preceding night, where I learn'd, without much surprize,
as I began to enter on her character, that she had seen every
thing that had passed, from a convenient place managed solely
for that purpose, and of which she readily made me the
     She had scarce finish'd this, when the little troop of
love, the girls my companions, broke in and renewed their
compliments and caresses.  I observed with pleasure that the
fatigues and exercises of the night had not usurped in the
least on the life of their complexion, or the freshness of 
their bloom: this I found, by their confession, was owing to
the management and advice of our rare directress.  They went
down then to figure it, as usual, in the shop, whilst I
repair'd to my lodgings, where I employed myself till I
     Here I staid in constant amusement, with one or other 
of these charming girls, till about five in the evening; when
seiz'd with a sudden drowsy fit, I was prevailed on to go up
and doze it off on Harriet's bed, who left me on it to my
repose.  There then I lay down in my cloaths and fell fast
asleep, and had now enjoyed, by guess, about an hour's rest,
when I was pleasingly disturbed by my new and favourite gal-
lant, who, enquiring for me, was readily directed where to
find me.  Coming then into my chamber, and seeing me lie
alone, with my face turn'd from the light towards the inside
of the bed, he, without more ado, just slipped off his
breeches, for the greater ease and enjoyment of the naked
touch; and softly turning up my petticoat and shift behind,
opened the prospect of the back avenue to the genial seat of
pleasure; where, as I lay at my side length, inclining rather
face downward, I appeared full fair, and liable to be entered.
/Laying himself then gently down by me, he invested me behind,
and giving me to feel the warmth of his body as he applied
his thighs and belly close to me, and the endeavours of that
machine, whose touch has something so exquisitely singular in
it, to make its way good into me.  I wak'd pretty much star-
tled at first, but seeing who it was, disposed myself to turn
to him, when he gave me a kiss, and desiring me to keep my
posture, just lifted up my upper thigh, and ascertaining the
right opening, soon drove it up to the farthest: satisfied
with which, and solacing himself with lying so close in those
parts, he suspended motion, and thus steeped in pleasure,
kept me lying on my side, into him, spoon-fashion, as he
term'd it, from the snug indent of the back part of my thighs,
and all upwards, into the space of the bending between his
thighs and belly; till, after some time, that restless and
turbulent inmate, impatient by nature of longer quiet, urg'd
him to action, which now prosecuting with all the usual train
of toying, kissing, and the like, ended at length in the
liquid proof on both sides, that we had not exhausted, or at
least were quickly recruited of last night's draughts of 
     With this noble and agreeable youth liv'd I in perfect
joy and constancy.  He was full bent on keeping me to himself,
for the honey-month at least; but his stay in London was not
even so long, his father, who had a post in Ireland, taking 
him abruptly with him on his repairing thither.  Yet even then
I was near keeping hold of his affection and person, as he had
propos'd, and I had consented to follow him in order to go to
Ireland after him, as soon as he could be settled there; but
meeting with an agreeable and advantageous match in that king-
dom, he chose the wiser part, and forebore sending for me, but
at the same time took care that I should receive a very magni-
ficent present, which did not however compensate for all my
     This event also created a chasm in our little society,
which Mrs. Cole, on the foot of her usual caution, was in no
haste to fill up; but then it redoubled her attention to pro-
cure me, in the advantages of a traffic for a counterfeit
maidenhead, some consolation for the sort of widowhood I had
been left in; and this was a scheme she had never lost pro-
spect of, and only waited for a proper person to bring it to 
     But I was, it seems, fated to be my own caterer in this, 
     I had now pass'd near a month in the enjoyment of all 
the pleasures of familiarity and society with my companions,
whose particular favourites (the baronet excepted, who soon
after took Harriet home) had all, on the terms of community
establish'd in the house, solicited the gratification of
their taste for variety in my embraces; but I had with the
utmost art and address, on various pretexts, eluded their
pursuit, without giving them cause to complain; and this
reserve I used neither out of dislike of them, or disgust of
the thing, but my true reason was my attachment to my own,
and my tenderness of invading the choice of my companions,
who outwardly exempt, as they seem'd, from jealousy, could 
not but in secret like me the better for the regard I had
for, without making a merit of it to them.  Thus easy, and
beloved by the whole family, did I go on; when one day, that,
about five in the afternoon, I stepped over to a fruiterer's
shop in Covent Garden, to pick some table fruit for myself
and the young women, I met with the following adventure.
     Whilst I was chaffering for the fruit I wanted, I ob-
serv'd myself follow'd by a young gentleman, whose rich 
dress first attracted my notice; for the rest, he had no-
thing remarkable in his person, except that he was pale, 
thin-made, and ventur'd himself upon legs rather of the 
slenderest.  Easy was it to perceive, without seeming to 
perceive it, that it was me he wanted to be at; and keeping
his eyes fixed on me, till he came to the same basket that
I stood at, and cheapening, or rather giving the first
price ask'd for the fruit, began his approaches.  Now most
certainly I was not at all out of figure to pass for a modest
girl.  I had neither the feathers nor fumet of a taudry town-
miss: a straw hat, a white gown, clean linen, and above all,
a certain natural and easy air of modesty (which the appear-
ances of never forsook me, even on those occasions that I
most broke in upon it, in practice) were all signs that gave
him no opening to conjecture my condition.  He spoke to me;
and this address from a stranger throwing a blush into my
cheeks that still set him wider off the truth, I answered
him with an aukwardness and confusion the more apt to impose,
as there was really a mixture of the genuine in them.  But
when proceeding, on the foot of having broken the ice, to
join discourse, he went into other leading questions, I put
so much innocence, simplicity, and even childishness into my
answers that on no better foundation, liking my person as he
did, I will answer for it, he would have been sworn for my
modesty.  There is, in short, in the men, when once they are
caught, by the eye especially, a fund of cullibility that
their lordly wisdom little dreams of, and in virtue of which
the most sagacious of them are seen so often our dupes.
Amongst other queries he put to me, one was whether I was
married.  I replied that I was too young to think of that
this many a year.  To that of my age, I answered, and sunk
a year upon him, passing myself for not seventeen.  As to my
way of life, I told him I had serv'd an apprenticeship to a 
milliner in Preston, and was come to town after a relation,
that I had found, on my arrival, was dead, and now liv'd
journey-woman to a milliner in town.  That last article,
indeed, was not much of the side of what I pretended to pass
for; but it did pass, under favour of the growing passion I
had inspir'd him with.  After he had next got out of me, 
very dextrously as he thought, what I had no sort of design
to make reserve of, my own, my mistress's name, and place of
abode, he loaded me with fruit, all the rarest and dearest
he could pick out, and sent me home, pondering on what might
     As soon then as I came to Mrs. Cole's, I related to her
all that passed, on which she very judiciously concluded 
that if he did not come after me there was no harm done, and
that, if he did, as her presage suggested to her he would,
his character and his views should be well sifted, so as to
know whether the game was worth the springs; that in the mean
time nothing was easier than my part in it, since no more
rested on me than to follow her cue and promptership through-
     The next morning, after an evening spent on his side, as
we afterwards learnt, in perquisitions into Mrs. Cole's char-
acter in the neighbourhood (than which nothing could be more
favourable to her design upon him), my gentleman came in his
chariot to the shop, where Mrs. Cole alone had an inkling of
his errand.  Asking then for her, he easily made a beginning
of acquaintance by be-speaking some millinery ware: when, as
I sat without lifting up my eyes, and pursuing the hem of a
ruffle with the utmost composure and simplicity of industry,
Mrs. Cole took notice that the first impressions I made on
him ran no risk of being destroyed by those of Louisa and
Emily, who were then sitting at work by me.  After vainly
endeavouring to catch my eyes in re-encounter with his (as I
held my head down, affecting a kind of consciousness of guilt
for having, by speaking to him, given him encouragement and
means of following me), and after giving Mrs. Cole direction
when to bring the things home herself, and the time he should
expect them, he went out, taking with him some goods that he
paid for liberally, for the better grace of his introduction. 
     The girls all this time did not in the least smoke the
mystery of this new customer; but Mrs. Cole, as soon as we
were conveniently alone, insur'd me, in virtue of her long
experience in these matters, that for this bout my charms had
not miss'd fire; for that by his eagerness, his manner and
looks, she was sure he had it: the only point now in doubt
was his character and circumstances, which her knowledge of
the town would soon gain her sufficient acquaintance with, to
     And effectively, in a few hours, her intelligence serv'd
her so well that she learn'd that this conquest of mine was 
no other than Mr. Norbert, a gentleman originally of great
fortune, which, with a constitution naturally not the best, 
he had vastly impaired by his over-violent pursuit of the 
vices of the town; in the course of which, having worn out
and stal'd all the more common modes of debauchery, he had
fallen into a taste of maiden-hunting; in which chase he had
ruin'd a number of girls, sparing no expence to compass his 
ends, and generally using them well till tired, or cool'd by
enjoyment, or springing a new face, he could with more ease
disembarrass himself of the old ones, and resign them to
their fate, as his sphere of achievements of that sort lay
only amongst such as he could proceed with by way of bargain
     Concluding from these premises, Mrs. Cole observ'd that
a character of this sort was ever a lawful prize; that the
sin would be, not to make the best of our market of him; and
that she thought such a girl as I only too good for him at
     She went then, at the hour appointed, to his lodgings in
one of our inns of court, which were furnished in a taste of
grandeur that had a special eye to all the conveniences of
luxury and pleasure.  Here she found him in ready waiting;
and after finishing her pretence of business, and a long
circuit of discussions concerning her trade, which she said
was very bad, the qualities of her servants, 'prentices,
journey-women, the discourse naturally landed at length on
me, when Mrs. Cole, acting admirably the good old prating
gossip, who lets every thing escape her when her tongue is
set in motion, cooked him up a story so plausible of me,
throwing in every now and then such strokes of art, with all
the simplest air of nature, in praise of my person and tem-
per, as finished him finely for her purpose, whilst nothing
could be better counterfeited than her innocence of his.  But
when now fired and on edge, he proceeded to drop hints of his
design and views upon me, after he had with much confusion
and pains brought her to the point (she kept as long aloof
from as she thought proper) of understanding him, without now
affecting to pass for a dragoness of virtue, by flying out
into those violent and ever suspicious passions, she stuck
with the better grace and effect to the character of a plain,
good sort of a woman, that knew no harm, and that getting her
bread in an honest way, was made of stuff easy and flexible 
enough to be wrought upon to his ends, by his superior skill
and address; but, however, she managed so artfully that three
or four meetings took place before he could obtain the least
favourable hope of her assistance; without which, he had, by
a number of fruitless messages, letters, and other direct
trials of my disposition, convinced himself there was no
coming at me, all which too rais'd at once my character and
     Regardful, however, of not carrying these difficulties
to such a length as might afford time for starting discov-
eries, or incidents, unfavourable to her plan, she at last
pretended to be won over by mere dint of entreaties, pro-
mises, and, above all, by the dazzling sum she took care to
wind him up to the specification of, when it was now even a
piece of art to feign, at once, a yielding to the allurements
of a great interest, as a pretext for her yielding at all, 
and the manner of it such as might persuade him she had never
dipp'd her virtuous fingers in an affair of that sort. 
     Thus she led him through all the gradations of diffi-
culty, and obstacles, necessary to enhance the balue of the
prize he aim'd at; and in conclusion, he was so struck with
the little beauty I was mistress of, and so eagerly bent on
gaining his ends of me, that he left her even no room to 
boast of her management in bringing him up to her mark, he
drove so plum of himself into every thing tending to make him
swallow the bait.  Not but, in other respects, Mr. Norbert
was not clear sighted enough, or that he did not perfectly
know the town, and even by experience, the very branch of
imposition now in practice upon him: but we had his passion
our friend so much, he was so blinded and hurried on by it,
that he would have thought any undeception a very ill office
done to his pleasure.  Thus concurring, even precipitately,
to the point she wanted him at, Mrs. Cole brought him at last
to hug himself on the cheap bargain he consider'd the pur-
chase of my imaginary jewel was to him, at no more than three
hundred guineas to myself, and a hundred to the brokeress:
being a slender recompense for all her pains, and all the
scruples of conscience she had now sacrificed to him for this
the first time of her life; which sums were to be paid down
on the nail, upon livery of my person, exclusive of some no
inconsiderable presents that had been made in the course of
the negotiation: during which I had occasionally, but spar-
ingly been introduc'd inbto his company, at proper times and
hours; in which it is incredible how little it seem'd neces-
sary to strain my natural disposition to modesty higher, in
order to pass it upon him for that of a very maid: all my
looks and gestures ever breathing nothing but that innocence
which the men so ardently require in us, for no other end
than to feast themselves with the pleasures of destroying it,
and which they are so grievously, with all their skill, sub-
     When the articles of the treaty had been fully agreed 
on, the stipulated payments duly secur'd, and nothing now
remained but the execution of the main point, which center'd
in the surrender of my person up to his free disposal and
use, Mrs. Cole managed her objections, especially to his
lodgings, and insinuations so nicely, that it became his own
mere notion and urgent request that this copy of a wedding
should be finish'd at her house:  At first, indeed, she did
not care, said she, to have such doings in it . . . she
would not for a thousand pounds have any of the servants or
'prentices know it . . . her precious good name would be gone
forever--with the like excuses.  However, on superior objec-
tions to all other expedients, whilst she took care to start
none but those which were most liable to them, it came round
at last to the necessity of her obliging him in that conveni-
ency, and of doing a little more where she had already done
     The night then was fix'd, with all possible respect to
the eagerness of his impatience, and in the mean time Mrs.
Cole had omitted no instructions, nor even neglected any
preparation, that might enable me to come off with honour,
in regard to the appearance of my virginity, except that,
favour'd as I was by nature with all the narrowness of
stricture in that part requisite to conduct my designs, I
had no occasion to borrow those auxiliaries of art that 
create a momentary one, easily discover'd by the test of a
warm bath; and as to the usual sanguinary symptoms of de-
floration, which, if not always, are generally attendants on
it, Mrs. Cole had made me the mistress of an invention of her
own which could hardly miss its effect, and of which more in
     Everything then being disposed and fix'd for Mr. Nor-
bert's reception, he was, at the hour of eleven at night,
with all the mysteries of silence and secrecy, let in by Mrs.
Cole herself, and introduced into her bed-chamber, where, in
an old-fashioned bed of her's, I lay, fully undressed, and
panting, if not with the fears of a real maid, at least with
those perhaps greater of a dissembled one which gave me an
air of confusion and bashfulness that maiden-modesty had all
the honour of, and was indeed scarce distinguishable from
it, even by less partial eyes than those of my lover: so let
me call him, for I ever thought the term "cully" too cruel a
reproach to the men for their abused weakness for us.
     As soon as Mrs. Cole, after the old gossipery, on these
occasions, us'd to young women abandoned for the first time
to the will of man, had left us alone in her room, which, by-
the-bye, was well lighted up, at his previous desire, that
seemed to bode a stricter examination that he afterwards
made, Mr. Norbert, still dressed, sprung towards the bed, 
where I got my head under the cloaths, and defended them a 
good while before he could even get at my lips, to kiss them:
so true it is, that a false virtue, on this occasion, even
makes a greater rout and resistance than a true one.  From
thence he descended to my breasts, the feel I disputed tooth
and nail with him till, tired with my resistance, and think-
ing probably to give a better account of me, when got into
bed to me, the hurry'd his cloaths off in an instant, and
     Mean while, by the glimpse I stole of him, I could
easily discover a person far from promising any such doughty
performances as the storming of maidenheads generally re-
quires, and whose flimsy consumptive texture gave him more
the air of an invalid that was pressed, than of a volunteer,
     At scarce thirty, he had already reduced his strength of
appetite down to a wretched dependence on forc'd provocatives,
very little seconded by the natural power of a body jaded and
racked off to the lees by constant repeated over-draughts of
pleasure, which had done the work of sixty winters on his
springs of life: leaving him at the same time all the fire
and heat of youth in his imagination, which served at once to
     As soon as he was in bed, he threw off the bed-cloaths,
which I suffered him to force from my hold, and I now lay as
expos'd as he could wish, not only to his attacks, but his
visitation of the sheets; where in the various agitations of
the body, through my endeavours to defend myself, he could 
easily assure himself there was no preparation: though, to do
him justice, he seem'd a less strict examinant than I had
apprehended from so experienc'd a practitioner.  My shift
then he fairly tore open, finding I made too much use of it
to barricade my breasts, as well as the more important
avenue: yet in every thing else he proceeded with all the
marks of tenderness and regard to me, whilst the art of my
play was to shew none for him.  I acted then all the nice-
ties, apprehensions, and terrors supposable for a girl per-
fectly innocent to feel at so great a novelty as a naked man
in bed with her for the first time.  He scarce even obtained
a kiss but what he ravished; I put his hand away twenty times
from my breasts, where he had satisfied himself of their 
hardness and consistence, with passing for hitherto unhandled
goods.  But when grown impatient for the main point, he now
threw himself upon me, and first trying to examine me with
his finger, sought to make himself further way, I complained
of his usage bitterly:  I thought he would not have serv'd a
body so . . . I was ruin'd . . . I did not know what I had
done . . . I would get up, so I would . . .; and at the same
time kept my thighs so fast locked, that it was not for
strength like his to force them open, or do any good.  Find-
ing thus my advantages, and that I had both my own and his
motions at command, the deceiving him came so easy that it
was perfectly playing upon velvet.  In the mean time his
machine, which was one of those sizes that slip in and out
without being minded, kept pretty stiffly bearing against
that part, which the shutting my thighs barr'd access to; but
finding, at length, he could do no good by mere dint of
bodily strength, he resorted to entreaties and arguments: to
which I only answer'd with a tone of shame and timidity, that
I was afraid he would kill me . . . Lord! . . ., I would not
be served so . . . I was never so used in all my born days .
. . I wondered he was not ashamed of himself, so I did . . .,
with such silly infantile moods of repulse and complaint as I
judged best adapted to the express the character of innocence
and affright.  Pretending, however, to yield at length to the
vehemence of his insistence, in action and words, I sparingly
disclosed my thighs, so that he could just touch the cloven
inlet with the tip of his instrument: but as he fatigued and
toil'd to get it in, a twist of my body, so as to receive it
obliquely, not only thwarted his admission, but giving a
scream, as if he had pierced me to the heart, I shook him off
me with such violence that he could not with all his might to
it, keep the saddle: vex'd indeed at this he seemed, but not
in the style of any displeasure with me for my skittishness;
on the contrary, I dare swear he held me the dearer, and
hugged himself for the difficulties that even hurt his
instant pleasure.  Fired, however, now beyond all bearance of
delay, he remounts and begg'd of me to have patience, strok-
ing and soothing me to it by all the tenderest endearments 
and protestations of what he would moreover do for me; at 
which, feigning to be something softened, and abating of the
anger that I had shewn at his hurting me so prodigiously, I
suffered him to lay my thighs aside, and make way for a new
trial; but I watched the directions and management of his
point so well, that no sooner was the orifice in the least
open to it, but I gave such a timely jerk as seemed to pro-
ceed not from the evasion of his entry, but from the pain his
efforts at it put me to: a circumstance too that I did not
fail to accompany with proper gestures, sighs and cries of
complaint, of which that he had hurt me . . . he kill'd me .
. . I should die . . ., were the most frequent interjections. 
But now, after repeated attempts, in which he had not made
the least impression towards gaining his point, at least for
that time, the pleasure rose so fast upon him that he could
not check or delay it, and in the vigour and fury which the
approaches of the height of it inspir'd him, he made one
fierce thrust, that had almost put me by my guard, and
lodged it so far that I could feel the warm inspersion just 
within the exterior orifice, which I had the cruelty not to
let him finish there, but threw him out again, not without a
most piercing loud exclamation, as if the pain had put me
beyond all regard of being overheard.  It was easy then to
observe that he was more satisfy'd, more highly pleased with
the supposed motives of his baulk of consummation, than he 
would have been at the full attainment of it.  It was on
this foot that I solved to myself all the falsity I employed
to procure him that blissful pleasure in it, which most
certainly he would not have tasted in the truth of things.
Eas'd however, and relieved by one discharge, he now apply'd
himself to sooth, encourage and to put me into humour and
patience to bear his next attempt, which he began to prepare
and gather force for, from all the incentives of the touch
and sight which he could think of, by examining every indi-
vidual part of my whole body, which he declared his satis-
faction with in raptures of applauses, kisses universally
imprinted, and sparing no part of me, in all the eagerest
wantonness  of feeling, seeing, and toying.  His vigour how-
ever did not return so soon, and I felt him more than once
pushing at the door, but so little in a condition to break
in, that I question whether he had the power to enter, had I
held it ever so open; but this he then thought me too little
acquainted with the nature of things to have any regret or
confusion about, and he kept fatiguing himself and me for a
long time, before he was in any state to resume his attacks
with any prospect of success; and then I breath'd him so 
warmly, and kept him so at bay, that before he had made any
sensible progress in point of penetration, he was deliciously
sweated, and weary'd out indeed: so that it was deep in the
morning before he achieved his second let-go, about half way
of entrance, I all the while crying and complaining of his
prodigious vigour, and the immensity of what I appear'd to
suffer splitting up with.  Tired, however, at length, with
such athletic drudgery, my champion began now to give out,
and to gladly embrace the refreshment of some rest.  Kissing
me then with much affection, and recommending me to my
repose, he presently fell fast asleep: which, as soon as I
had well satisfy'd myself of, I with much composure of body,
so as not to wake him by any motion, with much ease and
safety too, played of Mrs. Cole's advice for perfecting the
     In each of the head bed-posts, just above where the bed-
steads are inserted into them, there was a small drawer, so
artfully adapted to the mouldings of the timber-work, that it
might have escap'd even the most curious search: which
drawers were easily open'd or shut by the touch of a spring,
and were fitted each with a shallow glass tumbler, full of a
prepared fluid blood, in which lay soak'd, for ready use, a
sponge that required no more than gently reaching the hand to
it, taking it out and properly squeezing between the thighs,
when it yielded a great deal more of the red liquid than
would save a girl's honour; after which, replacing it, and
touching the spring, all possibility of discovery, or even of
suspicion, was taken away; and all this was not the work of
the fourth part of a minute, and on which ever side one lay,
the thing was equally easy and practicable, by the double
care taken to have each bed-post provided alike.  True it is,
that had he waked and caught me in the act, it would at least
have covered me with shame and confusion; but then, that he
did not, was, with the precautions I took, a risk of a thou-
     At ease now, and out of all fear of any doubt or sus-
picion on his side, I address'd myself in good earnest to my
repose, but could obtain none; and in about half an hour's
time my gentleman waked again, and turning towards me, I 
feigned a sound sleep, which he did not long respect; but
girding himself again to renew the onset, he began to kiss
and caress me, when now making as if I just wak'd, I com-
plained of the disturbance, and of the cruel pain that this
little rest had stole my senses from.  Eager, however, for
the pleasure, as well of consummating an entire triumph over
my virginity, he said everything that could overcome my
resistance, and bribe my patience to the end, which not I was
ready to listen to, from being secure of the bloody proofs I
had prepared of his victorious violence, though I still
thought it good policy not to let him in yet a while.  I
answered then only to his importunities in sighs and moans
that I was so hurt, I could not bear it . . . I was sure he
had done me a mischief; that he had . . . he was such a sad
man!  At this, turning down the cloaths and viewing the field
of battle by the glimmer of a dying taper, he saw plainly my
thighs, shift, and sheets, all stained with what he readily
took for a virgin effusion, proceeding from his last half-
penetration: convinc'd, and transported at which, nothing
could equal his joy and exultation.  The illusion was com-
plete, no other conception entered his head but that of his
having been at work upon an unopen'd mine; which idea, upon
so strong an evidence, redoubled at once his tenderness for
me, and his ardour for breaking it wholly up.  Kissing me
then with the utmost rapture, he comforted me, and begg'd my
pardon for the pain he had put me to: observing withal, that
it was only a thing in course: but the worst was certainly 
past, and that with a little courage and constancy, I should
get it once well over, and never after experience any thing
but the greatest pleasure.  By little and little I suffer'd
myself to be prevailed on, and giving, as it were, up the
point to him, I made my thighs, insensibly spreading them,
yield him liberty of access, which improving, he got a
little within me, when by a well managed reception I work'd
the female screw so nicely, that I kept him from the easy
mid-channel direction, and by dextrous wreathing and contor-
tions, creating an artificial difficulty of entrance, made
him win it inch by inch, with the most laborious struggles,
I all the while sorely complaining: till at length, with
might and main, winding his way in, he got it completely
home, and giving my virginity, as he thought, the coup de
grace, furnished me with the cue of setting up a terrible
outcry, whilst he, triumphant and like a cock clapping his
wings over his down-trod mistress, pursu'd his pleasure:
which presently rose, in virtue of this idea of a complete
victory, to a pitch that made me soon sensible of his melt-
ing period; whilst I now lay acting the deep wounded,breath-
     You would ask me, perhaps, whether all this time I
enjoy'd any perception of pleasure?  I assure you, little or
none, till just towards the latter end, a faintish sense of
it came on mechanically, from so long a struggle and frequent
fret in that ever sensible part; but, in the first place, I
had no taste for the person I was suffering the embraces of,
on a pure mercenary account; and then, I was not entirely
delighted with myself for the jade's part I was playing,
whatever excuses I might have to plead for my being brought
into it; but then this insensibility kept me so much the
mistress of my mind and motions, that I could the better
manage so close a counterfeit, through the whole scene of
     Recover'd at length to a more shew of life, by his ten-
der condolences, kisses and embraces, I upbraided him, and
reproach'd him with my ruin, in such natural terms as added
to his satisfaction with himself for having accomplish'd it;
and guessing, by certain observations of mine, that it would
be rather favourable to him, to spare him, when he some time
after, feebly enough, came on again to the assault, I reso-
lutely withstood any further endeavours, on a pretext that
flattered his prowess, of my being so violently hurt and sore
that I could not possibly endure a fresh trial.  He then gra-
ciously granted me a respite, and the next morning soon after
advancing, I got rid of further importunity, till Mrs. Cole,
being rang for by him, came in and was made acquainted, in
terms of the utmost joy and rapture, with his triumphant cer-
tainty of my virtue, and the finishing stroke he had given it
in the course of the night: of which, he added, she would see
     You may guess how a woman of her turn of address and
experience humour'd the jest, and played him off with mixed
exclamations of shame, anger, compassion for me, and of her
being pleased that all was so well over: in which last, I
believe, she was certainly sincere.  And now, as the objec-
tion which she had represented as an invincible one, to my 
lying the first night at his lodgings (which were studiously
calculated for freedom of intrigues), on the account of my
maiden fears and terrors at the thoughts of going to a
gentleman's chambers, and being alone with him in bed, was
surmounted, she pretended to persuade me, in favour to him,
that I should go there to him whenever he pleas'd, and still
keep up all the necessary appearances of working with her,
that I might not lose, with my character, the prospect of
getting a good husband, and at the same time her house would
be kept the safer from scandal.  All this seem'd so reason-
able, so considerate to Mr. Norbert, that he never once per-
ceived that she did not want him to resort to her house, lest
he might in time discover certain inconsistencies with the
character she had set out with to him: besides that, this
plan greatly flattered his own ease, and views of liberty.
     Leaving me then to my much wanted rest, he got up, and
Mrs. Cole, after settling with him all points relating to me,
got him undiscovered out of the house.  After which, as I was
awake, she came in and gave me due praises for my success.
Behaving too with her usual moderation and disinterestedness,
she refus'd any share of the sum I had thus earned, and put
me into such a secure and easy way of disposing of my af-
fairs, which now amounted to a kind of little fortune, that 
a child of ten years old might have kept the account and
     I was now restor'd again to my former state of a kept
mistress, and used punctually to wait on Mr. Norbert at his
chambers whenever he sent a messenger for me, which I con-
stantly took care to be in the way of, and manag'd with so
much caution that he never once penetrated the nature of my
connections with Mrs. Cole; but indolently given up to ease
and the town dissipations, the perpetual hurry of them hin-
der'd him from looking into his own affairs, much less to 
     In the mean time, if I may judge from my own experience,
none are better paid, or better treated, during their reign,
than the mistresses of those who, enervate by nature, debauc-
heries, or age, have the least employment for the sex: sen-
sible that a woman must be satisfy'd some way, they ply her
with a thousand little tender attentions, presents, caresses,
confidences, and exhaust their inventions in means and de-
vices to make up for the capital deficiency; and even towards
lessening that, what arts, what modes, what refinements of
pleasure have they not recourse to, to raise their languid
powers, and press nature into the service of their sensu-
ality?  But here is their misfortune, that when by a course
of teasing, worrying, handling, wanton postures, lascivious
motions, they have at length accomplish'd a flashy enervate
enjoyment, they at the same time lighted up a flame in the
object of their passion, that, not having the means them-
selves to quench, drives her for relief into the next per-
son's arms, who can finish their work; and thus they become
bawds to some favourite, tried and approv'd of, for a more
vigourous and satisfactory execution; for with women, of our
turn especially, however well our hearts may be dispos'd,
there is a controlling part, or queen seat in us, that
governs itself by its own maxims of state, amongst which not
one is stronger, in practice with it, than, in the matter of
     Mr. Norbert, who was much in this ungracious case,
though he profess'd to like me extremely, could but seldom
consummate the main-joy itself with me, without such a length
and variety of preparations, as were at once wearisome and
     Sometimes he would strip me stark naked on a carpet, by
a good fire, when he would contemplate me almost by the hour,
disposing me in all the figures and attitudes of body that it
was susceptible of being viewed in; kissing me in every part,
the most secret and critical one so far from excepted that it
received most of that branch of homage.  Then his touches
were so exquisitely wanton, so luxuriously diffus'd and pene-
trative at times, that he had made me perfectly rage with
titillating fires, when, after all, and with much ado, he had
gained a short-lived erection, he would perhaps melt it away
in a washy sweat, or a premature abortive effusion that pro-
vokingly mock'd my eager desires: or, if carried home, how 
falter'd and unnervous the execution! how insufficient the 
sprinkle of a few heat-drops to extinguish all the flames he
     One evening, I cannot help remembering that returning
home from him, with a spirit he had raised in a circle his
wand had prov'd too weak to lay, as I turn'd the corner of a
street, I was overtaken by a young sailor.  I was then in 
that spruce, neat, plain dress which I ever affected, and 
perhaps might have, in my trip, a certain air of restless-
ness unknown to the composure of cooler thoughts.  However,
he seiz'd me as a prize, and without farther ceremony threw
his arms round my neck and kiss'd me boisterously and
sweetly.  I looked at him with a beginning of anger and 
indignation at his rudeness, that softened away into other
sentiments as I viewed him: for he was tall, manly carri-
aged, handsome of body and face, so that I ended my stare
with asking him, in a tone turn'd to tenderness, what he
meant; at which, with the same frankness and vivacity as he
had begun with me, he proposed treating me with a glass of
wine.  Now, certain it is, that had I been in a calmer state
of blood than I was, had I not been under the dominion of
unappeas'd irritations and desires, I should have refused
him without hesitation; but I do not know how it was, my
pressing calls, his figure, the occasion, and if you will,
the powerful combination of all these, with a start of
curiosity to see the end of an adventure, so novel too as
being treated like a common street-plyer, made me give a
silent consent; in short, it was not my head that I now
obeyed, I suffered myself to be towed along as it were by
this man-of-war, who took me under his arm as familiarly as
if he had known me all his life-time, and led me into the
next convenient tavern, where we were shewn into a little
room on one side of the passage.  Here, scarce allowing him-
self patience till the waiter brought in the wine call'd for,
he fell directly on board me: when, untucking my handker-
chief, and giving me a snatching buss, he laid my breasts
bare at once, which he handled with that keenness of lust
that abridges a ceremonial ever more tiresome than pleasing
on such pressing occasions; and now, hurrying towards the
main point, we found no conveniency to our purpose, two or
three disabled chairs and a rickety table composing the whole
furniture of the room.  Without more ado, he plants me with 
my back standing against the wall, and my petticoats up; and
coming out with a splitter indeed, made it shine, as he
brandished it in my eyes; and going to work with an impetu-
osity and eagerness, bred very likely by a long fast at sea,
went ot give me a taste of it.  I straddled, I humoured my
posture, and did my best in short to buckle to it; I took
part of it in too, but still things did not go to his thor-
ough liking: changing then in a trice his system of battery,
he leads me to the table and with a master-hand lays my head
down on the edge of it, and, with the other canting up my
petticoats and shift, bares my naked posteriours to his blind
and furious guide; it forces its way between them, and I
feeling pretty sensibly that it was not going by the right
door, and knocking desperately at the wrong one, I told him
of it: -"Pooh!" says he, "my dear, any port in a storm."
Altering, however, directly his course, and lowering his
point, he fixed it right, and driving it up with a delicious
stiffness, made all foam again, and gave me the tout with
such fire and spirit, that in the fine disposition I was in
when I submitted to him, and stirr'd up so fiercely as I
was, I got the start of him, and went away into the melting
swoon, and squeezing him, whilst in the convulsive grasp of
it, drew from him such a plenteous bedewal as, join'd to my
own effusion, perfectly floated those parts, and drown'd in
     When this was over, how to make my retreat was my con-
cern; for, though I had been so extremely pleas'd with the
difference between this warm broadside, pour'd so briskly
into me, and the tiresome pawing and toying to which I had
owed the unappeas'd flames that had driven me into this step,
now I was grown cooler, I began to apprehend the danger of
contracting an acquaintance with this, however agreeable, 
stranger; who, on his side, spoke of passing the evening with
me and continuing our intimacy, with an air of determination
that made me afraid of its being not so easy to get away from
him as I could wish.  In the mean time I carefully conceal'd
my uneasiness, and readily pretended to consent to stay with
him, telling him I should only step to my lodgings to leave
a necessary direction, and then instantly return.  This he
very glibly swallowed, on the notion of my being one of those
unhappy street-errants who devote themselves to the pleasure
of the first ruffian that will stoop to pick them up, and of
course, that I would scarce bilk myself of my hire, by my not
returning to make the most of the job.  Thus he parted with
me, not before, however, he had order'd in my hearing a
supper, which I had the barbarity to disappoint him of my
     But when I got home and told Mrs. Cole my adventure, she
represented so strongly to me the nature and dangerous conse-
quences of my folly, particularly the risks to my health, in
being so open-legg'd and free, that I not only took resolu-
tions never to venture so rashly again, which I inviolably
preserv'd, but pass'd a good many days in continual uneasi-
ness lest I should have met with other reasons, besides the
pleasure of that encounter, to remember it; but these fears
wronged my pretty sailor, for which I gladly make him this
     I had now liv'd with Mr. Norbert near a quarter of a
year, in which space I circulated my time very pleasantly
between my amusements at Mrs. Cole's, and a proper attendance
on that gentleman, who paid me profusely for the unlimited
complaisance with which I passively humoured every caprice of
pleasure, and which had won upon him so greatly, that find-
ing, as he said, all that variety in me alone which he had
sought for in a number of women, I had made him lose his 
taste for inconstancy, and new faces.  But what was yet at
least agreeable, as well as more flattering, the love I had
inspir'd him with bred a deference to me that was of great
service to his health: for having by degrees, and with most
pathetic representations, brought him to some husbandry of 
it, and to insure the duration of his pleasures by moderat-
ing their use, and correcting those excesses in them he was
so addicted to, and which had shatter'd his constitution and
destroyed his powers of life in the very point for which he
seemed chiefly desirous, to live, he was grown more delicate,
more temperate, and in course more healthy; his gratitude
for which was taking a turn very favourable for my fortune,
when once more the caprice of it dash'd the cup from my lips.
     His sister, Lady L . . ., for whom he had a great affec-
tion, desiring him to accompany her down to Bath for her
health, he could not refuse her such a favour; and accord-
ingly, though he counted on staying away from me no more than
a week at farthest, he took his leave of me with an ominous
heaviness of heart, and left me a sum far above the state of
his fortune, and very inconsistent with the intended short-
ness of his journey; but it ended in the longest that can be,
and is never but once taken: for, arriv'd at Bath, he was not
there two days before he fell into a debauch of drinking with
some gentlemen, that threw him into a high fever and carry'd
him off in four days time, never once out of a delirium.  Had
he been in his senses to make a will, perhaps he might have
made favourable mention of me in it.  Thus, however, I lost
him; and as no condition of life is more subject to revolu-
tions than that of a woman of pleasure, I soon recover'd my
cheerfulness, and now beheld myself once more struck off the
list of kept-mistresses, and returned into the bosom of the
community from which I had been in some manner taken.
     Mrs. Cole still continuing her friendship, offered me
her assistance and advice towards another choice; but I was
now in ease and affluence enough to look about me at lei-
sure; and as to any constitutional calls of pleasure, their
pressure, or sensibility, was greatly lessen'd by a consci-
ousness of the ease with which they were to be satisfy'd at
Mrs. Cole's house, where Louisa and Emily still continu'd in
the old way; and by great favourite Harriet used often to
come and see me, and entertain me, with her head and heart
full of the happiness she enjoy'd with her dear baronet,
whom she loved with tenderness, and constancy, even though
he was her keeper, and what is yet more, had made her inde-
pendent, by a handsome provision for her and hers.  I was
then in this vacancy from any regular employ of my person, in
my way of business, when one day, Mrs. Cole, in the course of
the constant confidence we lived in, acquainted me that there
was one Mr. Barville, who used her house, just come to town,
whom she was not a little perplex'd about providing a suit-
able companion for; which was indeed a point of difficulty,
as he was under the tyranny of a cruel taste: that of an
ardent desire, not only of being unmercifully whipp'd him-
self, but of whipping others, in such sort, that tho' he paid 
extravagantly those who had the courage and complaisance to
submit to his humour, there were few, delicate as he was in
the choice of his subjects, who would exchange turns with him
so terrible at the expense of their skin.  But, what yet in-
creased the oddity of this strange fancy was the gentleman
being young; whereas it generally attacks, it seems, such as
are, through age, obliged to have recourse to this experi-
ment, for quickening the circulation of their sluggish
juices, and determining a conflux of the spirits of pleasure
towards those flagging, shrivelly parts, that rise to life
only by virtue of those titillating ardours created by the
discipline of their opposites, with which they have so sur-
     This Mrs. Cole could not well acquaint me with, in any
expectation of my offering my service: for, sufficiently easy
as I was in my circumstances, it must have been the tempta-
tion of an immense interest indeed that could have induced me
to embrace such a job; neither had I ever express'd, nor in-
deed felt, the least impulse or curiosity to know more of a
taste that promis'd so much more pain than pleasure to those
that stood in no need of such violent goads: what then should
move me to subscribe myself voluntarily to a party of pain,
foreknowing it such?  Why, to tell the plain truth, it was a
sudden caprice, a gust of fancy for trying a new experiment,
mix'd with the vanity of proving my personal courage to Mrs.
Cole, that determined me, at all risks, to propose myself to
her, and relieve her from any farther lookout.  Accordingly,
I at once pleas'd and surpris'd her with a frank and unre-
served tender of my person to her, and her friend's absolute
     My good temporal mother was, however, so kind as to use
all the arguments she could imagine to dissuade me: but, as
I found they only turn'd on a motive of tnederness to me, I
persisted in my resolution, and thereby acquitted my offer of
any suspicion of its not having been sincerely made, or out
of compliment only.  Acquiescing then thankfully in it, Mrs.
Cole assur'd me that bating the pain I should be put to, she
had no scruple to engage me to this party, which she assur'd
me I should be liberally paid for, and which, the secrecy of
the transaction preserved safe from the ridicule that other-
wise vulgarly attended it; that for her part, she considered
pleasure, of one sort or other, as the universal port of
destination, and every wind that blew thither a good one,
provided it blew nobody any harm; that she rather compas-
sionated, than blam'd, those unhappy persons who are under a
subjection they cannot shake off, to those arbitrary tastes
that rule their appetites of pleasures with an unaccountable
control: tastes, too, as infinitely deversify'd, as superior
to, and independent of, all reasoning as the different re-
lishes or palates of mankind in their viands, some delicate
stomachs nauseating plain meats, and finding no savour but in
high-seasoned, luxurious dishes, whilst others again pique
     I stood now in no need of this preamble of encourage-
ment, of justification: my word was given, and I was deter-
min'd to fulfil my engagements.  Accordingly the night was
set, and I had all the necessary previous instructions how to
act and conduct myself.  The dining-room was duly prepared 
and lighted up, and the young gentleman posted there in wait-
     I was then, by Mrs. Cole, brought in, and presented to
him, in a loose dishabille fitted, by her direction, to the
exercise I was to go through, all in the finest linen and a
thorough white uniform: gown, petticoat, stockings, and satin
slippers, like a victim led to sacrifice; whilst my dark
auburn hair, falling in drop-curls over my neck, created a
pleasing distinction of colour from the rest of my dress.
     As soon as Mr. Barville saw me, he got up, with a visi-
ble air of pleasure and surprize, and saluting me, asked Mrs.
Cole if it was possible that so fine and delicate a creature
would voluntarily submit to such sufferings and rigours as
were the subject of his assignation.  She answer'd him pro-
perly, and now, reading in his eyes that she could not too
soon leave us together, she went out, after recommending to
     But whilst she was employing his attention, mine had 
been taken up with examining the figure and person of this
unhappy young gentleman, who was thus unaccountably condemn'd
to have his pleasure lashed into him, as boys have their
     He was exceedingly fair, and smooth complexion'd, and
appeared to me no more than twenty at most, tho' he was three
years older than what my conjectures gave him; but then he
ow'd this favourable mistake to a habit of fatness, which 
spread through a short, squab stature, and a round, plump,
fresh-coloured face gave him greatly the look of a Bacchus,
had not an air of austerity, not to say sternness, very un-
suitable even to his shape of face, dash'd that character of
joy, necessary to complete the resemblance.  His dress was
extremely neat, but plain, and far inferior to the ample for-
tune he was in full possession of; this too was a taste in
     As soon as Mrs. Cole was gone, he seated me near him,
when now his face changed upon me into an expression of the
most pleasing sweetness and good humour, the more remarkable
for its sudden shift from the other extreme, which, I found
afterwards, when I knew more of his character, was owing to 
a habitual state of conflict with, and dislike of himself, 
for being enslaved to so peculiar a gust, by the fatality of
a constitutional ascendant, that render'd him incapable of
receiving any pleasure till he submitted to these extraordi-
nary means of procuring it at the hands of pain, whilst the 
constancy of this repining consciousness stamp'd at length
that cast of sourness and severity on his features: which
was, in fact, very foreign to the natural sweetness of his
     After a competent preparation by apologies, and en-
couragement to go through my part with spirit and constancy,
he stood up near the fire, whilst I went to fetch the in-
struments of discipline out of a closet hard by: these were
several rods, made each of two or three strong twigs of birch
tied together, which he took, handled, and view'd with as
much pleasure, as I did with a kind of shuddering presage.
     Next we took from the side of the room a long broad
bench, made easy to lie at length on by a soft cushion in a
callico-cover; and every thing being now ready, he took his
coat and waistcoat off; and at his motion and desire, I un-
button'd his breeches, and rolling up his shirt rather above
his waist, tuck'd it in securely there: when directing natur-
ally my eyes to that humoursome master-movement, in whose
favour all these dispositions were making, it seemed almost
shrunk into his body, scarce shewing its tip above the sprout
of hairy curls that cloathed those parts, as you may have
     Stooping then to untie his garters, he gave them me for
the use of tying him down to the legs of the bench: a cir-
cumstance no farther necessary than, as I suppose, it made 
part of the humour of the thing, since he prescribed it to
     I led him then to the bench, and according to my cue, 
play'd at forcing him to lie down: which, after some little
shew of reluctance, for form-sake, he submitted to; he was
straightway extended flat upon his belly, on the bench, with
a pillow under his face; and as he thus tamely lay, I tied
him slightly hand and foot, to the legs of it; which done,
his shirt remaining truss'd up over the small of his back, I
drew his breeches quite down to his knees; and now he lay, 
in all the fairest, broadest display of that part of the 
back-view; in which a pair of chubby, smooth-cheek'd and
passing white posteriours rose cushioning upwards from two
stout, fleshful thighs, and ending their cleft, or separa-
tion by an union at the small of the back, presented a bold
mark, that swell'd, as it were, to meet the scourge.
     Seizing now one of the rods, I stood over him, and
according to his direction, gave him in one breath, ten
lashes with much good-will, and the utmost nerve and vigour
of arm that I could put to them, so as to make those fleshy
orbs quiver again under them; whilst he himself seem'd no
more concern'd, or to mind them, than a lobster would a flea-
bite.  In the mean time, I viewed intently the effects of
them, which to me at least appear'd surprisingly cruel: every
lash had skimmed the surface of those white cliffs, which 
they deeply reddened, and lapping round the side of the fur-
thermost from me, cut specially, into the dimple of it such
livid weals, as the blood either spun out from, or stood in
large drops on; and, from some of the cuts, I picked out even
the splinters of the rod that had stuck in the skin.  Nor was
this raw work to be wonder'd at, considering the greenness of
the twigs and the severity of the infliction, whilst the
whole surface of his skin was so smooth-stretched over the 
hard and firm pulp of flesh that fill'd it, as to yield no
play, or elusive swagging under the stroke: which thereby
     I was however already so mov'd at the piteous sight, 
that I from my heart repented the undertaking, and would
willingly have given over, thinking he had full enough; but,
he encouraging and beseeching me earnestly to proceed, I gave
him ten more lashes; and then resting, survey'd the increase
of bloody appearances.  And at length, steel'd to the sight
by his stoutness in suffering, I continued the discipline, by
intervals, till I observ'd him wreathing and twisting his
body, in a way that I could plainly perceive was not the
effect of pain, but of some new and powerful sensation: curi-
ous to dive into the meaning of which, in one of my pauses of
intermission, I approached, as he still kept working, and
grinding his belly against the cushion under him; and, first
stroking the untouched and unhurt side of the flesh-mount
next me, then softly insinuating my hand under his thigh,
felt the posture things were in forwards, which was indeed
surprizing: for that machine of his, which I had, by its ap-
pearance, taken for an impalpable, or at best a very diminu-
tive subject, was now, in virtue of all that smart and havoc
of his skin behind, grown not only to a prodigious stiffness
of erection, but to a size that frighted even me: a non-
pareil thickness indeed! the head of it alone fill'd the ut-
most capacity of my grasp.  And when, as he heav'd and wrig-
gled to and fro, in the agitation of his strange pleasure,
it came into view, it had something of the air of a round
fillet of the whitest veal, and like its owner, squab, and
short in proportion to its breadth; but when he felt my hand
there, he begg'd I would go on briskly with my jerking, or he
should never arrive at the last stage of pleasure.
     Resuming then the rod and the exercise of it, I had
fairly worn out three bundles, when, after an increase of 
struggles and motion, and a deep sigh or two, I saw him lie
still and motionless; and now he desir'd me to desist, which
I instantly did; and proceeding to untie him, I could not but
be amazed at his passive fortitude, on viewing the skin of
his butcher'd, mangled posteriours, late so white, smooth and
polish'd, now all one side of them a confused cut-work of
weals, livid flesh, gashes and gore, insomuch that when he
stood up, he could scarce walk; in short, he was in sweet-
     Then I plainly perceived, on the cushion, the marks of a
plenteous effusion, and already had his sluggard member run
up to its old nestling-place, and enforced itself again, as 
if ashamed to shew its head; which nothing, it seems, could
raise but stripes inflicted on its opposite neighbours, who
were thus constantly obliged to suffer for his caprice.
     My gentleman had now put on his clothes and recomposed
himself, when giving me a kiss, and placing me by him, he sat
himself down as gingerly as possible, with one side off the
cushion, which was too sore for him to bear resting any part
     Here he thank'd me for the extreme pleasure I had pro-
cured him, and seeing, perhaps, some marks in my countenance
of terror and apprehension of retaliation on my own skin, for
what I had been the instrument of his suffering in his, he
assured me, that he was ready to give up to me any engagement
I might deem myself under to stand him, as he had done me,
but if that proceeded in my consent to it, he would consider
the difference of my sex, its greater delicacy and incapacity
to undergo pain.  Rehearten'd at which, and piqu'd in honour,
as I thought, not to flinch so near the trial, especially as
I well knew Mrs. Cole was an eye-witness, from her stand of
espial, to the whole of our transactions, I was now less
afraid of my skin than of his not furnishing me with an oppor-
     Consonant to this disposition was my answer, but my
courage was still more in my head, than in my heart; and as
cowards rush into the danger they fear, in order to be the
sooner rid of the pain of that sensation, I was entirely
pleas'd with his hastening matters into execution.
     He had then little to do, but to unloose the strings of
my petticoats, and lift them, together with my shift, navel-
high, where he just tuck'd them up loosely girt, and might be
slipt up higher at pleasure.  Then viewing me round with
great seeming delight, he laid me at length on my face upon
the bench, and when I expected he would tie me, as I had done
him, and held out my hands, not without fear and a little
trembling, he told me he would by no means terrify me un-
necessarily with such a confinement; for that though he meant
to put my constancy to some trial, the standing it was to be
completely voluntary on my side, and therefore I might be at
full liberty to get up whenever I found the pain too much for
me.  You cannot imagine how much I thought myself bound, by
being thus allow'd to remain loose, and how much spirit this
confidence in me gave me, so that I was even from my heart
careless how much my flesh might suffer in honour of it.
     All by back parts, naked half way up, were now fully at
his mercy: and first, he stood at a convenient distance, de-
lighting himself with a gloating survey of the attitude I lay
in, and of all the secret stores I thus expos'd to him in
fair display.  Then, springing eagerly towards me, he cover'd
all those naked parts with a fond profusion of kisses; and
now, taking hold of the rod, rather wanton'd with me, in gen-
tle inflictions on those tender trembling masses of my flesh
behind, than in any way hurt them, till by degrees, he began
to tingle them with smarter lashes, so as to provoke a red
colour into them, which I knew, as well by the flagrant glow
I felt there, as by his telling me, they now emulated the
native roses of my other cheeks.  When he had thus amus'd
himself with admiring and toying with them, he went on to 
strike harder, and more hard; so that I needed all my patience
not to cry out, or complain at least.  At last, he twigg'd me
so smartly as to fetch blood in more than one lash: at sight
of which he flung down the rod, flew to me, kissed away the
starting drops, and sucking the wounds eased a good deal of my
pain.  But now raising me on my knees, and making me kneel
with them straddling wide, that tender part of me, naturally
the province of pleasure, not of pain, came in for its share
of suffering: for now, eyeing it wistfully, he directed the
rod so that the sharp ends of the twigs lighted there, so
sensibly, that I could not help wincing, and writhing my
limbs with smart; so that my contortions of body must neces-
sarily throw it into infinite variety of postures and points
of view, fit to feast the luxury of the eye.  But still I
bore every thing without crying out: when presently giving me
another pause, he rush'd, as it were, on that part whose lips,
and round-about, had felt this cruelty, and by way of repara-
tion, glews his own to them; then he opened, shut, squeez'd
them, pluck'd softly the overgrowing moss, and all this in a
style of wild passionate rapture and enthusiasm, that ex-
press'd excess of pleasure; till betaking himself to the rod
again, encourag'd by my passiveness, and infuriated with this
strange taste of delight, he made my poor posteriours pay for
the ungovernableness of it; for now shewing them no quarter
the traitor cut me so, that I wanted but little of fainting
away, when he gave over.  And yet I did not utter one groan,
or angry expostulation; but in heart I resolv'd nothing so
seriously, as never to expose myself again to the like ser-
     You may guess then in what a curious pickle those soft
flesh-cushions of mine were, all sore, raw, and in fine, ter-
ribly clawed off; but so far from feeling any pleasure in it,
that the recent smart made me pout a little, and not with the
greatest air of satisfaction receive the compliments, and
     As soon as my cloaths were huddled on in a little de-
cency, a supper was brought in by the discreet Mrs. Cole her-
self, which might have piqued the sensuality of a cardinal,
accompanied with a choice of the richest wines: all which she
set before us, and went out again, without having, by a word
or even by a smile, given us the least interruption or confu-
sion, in those moments of secrecy, that we were not yet ripe
     I sat down then, still scarce in charity with my butch-
er, for such I could not help considering him, and was more-
over not a little piqued at the gay, satisfied air of his
countenance, which I thought myself insulted by.  But when
the now necessary refreshment to me of a glass of wine, a
little eating (all the time observing a profound silence) had
somewhat cheer'd and restor'd me to spirits, and as the smart
began to go off, my good humour return'd accordingly: which
alteration not escaping him, he said and did everything that
     But scarce was supper well over, before a change so in-
credible was wrought in me, such violent, yet pleasingly irk-
some sensations took possession of me that I scarce knew how
to contain myself; the smart of the lashes was now converted
into such a prickly heat, such fiery tinglings, as made me
sigh, squeeze my thighs together, shift and wriggle about my
seat, with a furious restlessness; whilst these itching ar-
dours, thus excited in those parts on which the storm of dis-
cipline had principally fallen, detach'd legions of burning,
subtile, stimulating spirits, to their opposite spot and cen-
tre of assemblage, where their titillation rag'd so furiously,
that I was even stinging mad with them.  No wonder then, that
in such a taking, and devour'd by flames that licked up all
modesty and reserve, my eyes, now charg'd brimful of the most
intense desire, fired on my companion very intelligible sig-
nals of distress: my companion, I say, who grew in them every
instant more amiable, and more necessary to my urgent wishes
     Mr. Barville, no stranger by experience to these situa-
tions, soon knew the pass I was brought to, soon perceiv'd my
extreme disorder; in favour of which, removing the table out
of the way, he began a prelude that flatter'd me with instant
relief, to which I was not, however, so near as I imagin'd:
for as he was unbuttoned to me, and tried to provoke and
rouse to action his unactive torpid machine, he blushingly
own'd that no good was to be expected from it unless I took
it in hand to re-excite its languid loitering powers, by just
refreshing the smart of the yet recent blood-raw cuts, seeing
it could, no more than a boy's top, keep up without lashing.
Sensible then that I should work as much for my own profit as
his, I hurried my compliance with his desire, and abridging
the ceremonial, whilst he lean'd his head against the back of
a chair, I had scarce gently made him feel the lash, before I
saw the object of my wishes give signs of life, and presently,
as it were with a magic touch, it started up into a noble size
and distinction indeed!  Hastening then to give me the benefit
of it, he threw me down on the bench; but such was the re-
fresh'd soreness of those parts behind, on my leaning so hard
on them, as became me to compass the admission of that stupen-
dous head of his machine, that I could not possibly bear it.
I got up then, and tried, by leaning forwards and turning the
crupper on my assailant, to let him at the back avenue: but
here it was likewise impossible to stand his bearing so
fiercely against me, in his agitations and endeavours to enter
that way, whilst his belly battered directly against the
recent sore.  What should we do now? both intolerably heated;
both in a fury; but pleasure is ever inventive for its own
ends: he strips me in a trice, stark naked, and placing a
broad settee-cushion on the carpet before the fire, oversets
me gently, topsy-turvy, on it; and handling me only at the
waist, whilst you may be sure I favour'd all my dispositions,
brought my legs round his neck; so that my head was kept from
the floor only by my hands and the velvet cushion, which was
now bespread with my flowing hair: thus I stood on my head
and hands, supported by him in such manner, that whilst my
thighs clung round him, so as to expose to his sight all my
back figure, including the theatre of his bloody pleasure,
the centre of my fore part fairly bearded the object of its
rage, that now stood in fine condition to give me satisfaction
for the injuries of its neighbours.  But as this posture was
certainly not the easiest, and our imaginations, wound up to
the height, could suffer no delay, he first, with the utmost
eagerness and effort, just lip-lodg'd that broad acorn-fas-
hion'd head of his instrument; and still frenzied by the fury
with which he had made that impression, he soon stuffed in
the rest; when now, with a pursuit of thrusts, fiercely urg'd,
he absolutely overpower'd and absorb'd all sense of pain and
uneasiness, whether from my wounds behind, my most untoward
posture, or the oversize of his stretcher, in an infinitely
predominant delight; when now all my whole spirits of life
and sensation, rushing impetuously to the cock-pit, where the
prize of pleasure was hotly in dispute and clustering to a
point there, I soon receiv'd the dear relief of nature from
these over-violent strains and provocations of it; harmoniz-
ing with which, my gallant spouted into me such a potent over-
flow of the balsamic injection, as soften'd and unedg'd all
those irritating stings of a new species of titillation, which
I had been so intolerably madden'd with, and restor'd the fer-
     I had now achiev'd this rare adventure ultimately much
more to my satisfaction than I had bespoken the nature of it
to turn out; nor was it much lessen'd, you may think, by my
spark's lavish praises of my constancy and complaisance, which
he gave weight to by a present that greatly surpassed my ut-
most expectation, besides his gratification to Mrs. Cole.
     I was not, however, at any time, re-enticed to renew
with him, or resort again to the violent expedient of lashing
nature into more haste than good speed: which, by the way, I
conceive acts somewhat in the manner of a dose of Spanish
flies; with more pain perhaps, but less danger; and might be
necessary to him, but was nothing less so than to me, whose
     Mrs. Cole, to whom this adventurous exploit had more and
more endear'd me, looked on me now as a girl after her own
heart, afraid on nothing, and, on a good account, hardy enough
to fight all the weapons of pleasure through.  Attentive then,
in consequence of these favourable conceptions, to promote 
either my profit or pleasure, she had special regard for the
first, in a new gallant of a very singular turn, that she pro-
     This was a grave, staid, solemn, elderly gentleman whose
peculiar humour was a delight in combing fine tresses of hair;
and as I was perfectly headed to his taste, he us'd to come
constantly at my toilette hours, when I let down my hair as
loose as nature, and abandon'd it to him to do what he pleased     
with it; and accordingly he would keep me an hour or more in
play with it, drawing the comb through it, winding the curls
round his fingers, even kissing it as he smooth'd it; and all
this led to no other use of my person, or any other liberties
whatever, any more than if a distinction of sexes had not
     Another peculiarity of taste he had, which was to present
me with a dozen pairs of the whitest kid gloves at a time:
these he would divert himself with drawing on me, and then 
biting off the fingers' ends; all which fooleries of a sickly
appetite, the old gentleman paid more liberally for than most
others did for more essential favours.  This lasted till a
violent cough, seizing and laying him up, deliver'd me from
this most innocent and insipid trifler, for I never heard more
     You may be sure a by-job of this sort interfer'd with no
other pursuit, or plan of life; which I led, in truth, with a
modesty and reserve that was less the work of virtue than of
exhausted novelty, a glut of pleasure, and easy circumstances,
that made me indifferent to any engagements in which pleasure
and profit were not eminently united; and such I could, with
the less impatience, wait for at the hands of time and for-
tune, as I was satisfy'd I could never mend my pennyworths,
having evidently been serv'd at the top of market, and even
been pamper'd with dainties: besides that, in the sacrifice
of a few momentary impulses, I found a secret satisfaction in
respecting myself, as well as preserving the life and fresh-
ness of my complexion.  Louisa and Emily did not carry indeed
their reserve so high as I did; but still they were far from
cheap or abandon'd tho' two of their adventures seem'd to con-
tradict this general character, which, for their singularity,
I shall give you in course, beginning first with Emily's: 
     Louisa and she went one night to a ball, the first in
the habit of a shepherdess, Emily in that of a shepherd:  I
saw them in their dresses before they went, and nothing in
nature could represent a prettier boy than this last did,
being so fair and well limbed.  They had kept together for
some time, when Louisa, meeting an old acquaintance of hers,
very cordially gives her companion the drop, and leaves her
under the protection of her boy's habit, which was not much,
and of her discretion, which was, it seems, still less.
Emily, finding herself deserted, sauntered thoughtless about
a-while, and, as much for coolness and air as anything else,
at length pull'd off her mask and went to the sideboard;
where, eyed and mark'd out by a gentleman in a very handsome
domino, she was accosted by, and fell into chat with him.
The domino, after a little discourse, in which Emily doubt-
less distinguish'd her good nature and easiness more than her
wit, began to make violent love to her, and drawing her in-
sensibly to some benches at the lower end of the masquerade
room, for her to sit by him, where he squeez'd her hands, 
pinch'd her cheeks, prais'd and played with her fine hair, 
admired her complexion, and all in a style of courtship dash'd
with a certain oddity, that not comprehending the mystery of,
poor Emily attributed to his falling in with the humour of her
disguise; and being naturally not the cruellest of her profes-
sion, began to incline to a parley on those essentials.  But
here was the stress of the joke: he took her really for what
she appear'd to be, a smock-fac'd boy; and she, forgetting her
dress, and of course ranging quite wide of his ideas, took all
those addresses to be paid to herself as a woman, which she
precisely owed to his not thinking her one.  However, this
double error was push'd to such a height on both sides, that
Emily, who saw nothing in him but a gentleman of distinction
by those points of dress to which his disguise did not extend,
warmed too by the wine he had ply'd her with, and the caresses
he had lavished upon her, suffered herself to be persuaded to
go to a bagnio with him; and thus, losing sight of Mrs. Cole's
cautions, with a blind confidence, put herself into his hands,
to be carried wherever he pleased.  For his part, equally
blinded by his wishes, whilst her egregious simplicity favour-
ed his deception more than the most exquisite art could have
done, he supposed, no doubt, that he had lighted on some soft
simpleton, fit for his purpose, or some kept minion broken to
his hand, who understood him perfectly well and enter'd into
his designs.  But, be that as it would, he led her to a coach,
went into it with her, and brought her to a very handsome
apartment, with a bed in it; but whether it was a bagnio or
not, she could not tell, having spoken to nobody but himself.
But when they were alone together, and her enamorato began to
proceed to those extremities which instantly discover the sex,
she remark'd that no description could paint up to the life
the mixture of pique, confusion and disappointment that ap-
peared in his countenance, joined to the mournful exclamation:
"By heavens, a woman!"  This at once opened her eyes, which
had hitherto been shut in downright stupidity.  However, as if
he had meant to retrieve that escape, he still continu'd to
toy with and fondle her, but with so staring an alteration
from extreme warmth into a chill and forced civility, that
even Emily herself could not but take notice of it, and now
began to wish she had paid more regard to Mrs. Cole's premon-
itions against ever engaging with a stranger.  And now and
excess of timidity succeeded to an excess of confidence, and
she thought herself so much at his mercy and discretion, that
she stood passive throughout the whole progress of his pre-
lude: for now, whether the impressions of so great a beauty
had even made him forgive her her sex, or whether her appear-
ance of figure in that dress still humour'd his first illu-
sion, he recover'd by degrees a good part of his first warmth,
and keeping Emily with her breeches still unbuttoned, stript
them down to her knees, and gently impelling her to lean down,
with her face against the bed-side, placed her so, that the 
double way, between the double rising behind, presented the
choice fair to him, and he was so fairly set on a mis-direc-
tion, as to give the girl no small alarms for fear of losing
a maidenhead she had not dreamt of.  However, her complaints,
and a resistance, gentle, but firm, check'd and brought him
to himself again; so that turning his steed's head, he drove
him at length in the right road, in which his imagination
having probably made the most of those resemblances that
flatter'd his taste, he got, with much ado, to his journey's
end: after which, he led her out himself, and walking with
her two or three streets' length, got her a chair, when mak-
ing her a present not any thing inferior to what she could
have expected, he left her, well recommended to the chairman,  
     This she related to Mrs. Cole and me the same morning,
not without the visible remains of the fear and confusion she
had been in still stamp'd on her countenance.  Mrs. Cole's
remark was that her indescretion proceeding from a constitu-
tional facility, there were little hopes of any thing curing
her of it, but repeated severe experience.  Mine was that I
could not conceive how it was possible for mankind to run
into a taste, not only universally odious, but absurd, and
impossible to gratify; since, according to the notions and
experience I had of things, it was not in nature to force
such immense disproportions.  Mrs. Cole only smil'd at my
ignorance, and said nothing towards my undeception, which was
not affected but by ocular demonstration, some months after,
which a most singular accident furnish'd me, and which I will
here set down, that I may not return again to so disagreeable
     I had, on a visit intended to Harriet, who had taken
lodgings at Hampton-court, hired a chariot to go out thither,
Mrs. Cole having promis'd to accompany me; but some indis-
pensable business intervening to detain her, I was obliged to
set out alone; and scarce had I got a third of my way, before
the axle-tree broke down, and I was well off to get out, safe
and unhurt, into a publick-house of a tolerable handsome ap-
pearance, on the road.  Here the people told me that the
stage would come by in a couple of hours at farthest; upon 
which, determining to wait for it, sooner than lose the jaunt
I had got so far forward on, I was carried into a very clean
decent room, up one pair of stairs, which I took possession of
for the time I had to stay, in right of calling for sufficient
     Here, whilst I was amusing myself with looking out of the
window, a single horse-chaise stopt at the door, out of which
lightly leap'd two gentlemen, for so they seem'd, who came in
only as it were to bait and refresh a little, for they gave
their horse to be held in readiness against they came out.  
And presently I heard the door of the next room, where they 
were let in, and call'd about them briskly; and as soon as 
they were serv'd, I could just hear that they shut and fast-
     A spirit of curiosity, far from sudden, since I do not 
know when I was without it, prompted me, without any parti-
cular suspicion, or other drift or view, to see what they
were, and examine their persons and behaviour.  The partition
of our rooms was one of those moveable ones that, when taken
down, serv'd occasionally to lay them into one, for the con-
veniency of a large company; and now, my nicest search could
not shew me the shadow of a peep-hole, a circumstance which
probably had not escap'd the review of the parties on the 
other side, whom much it stood upon not to be deceived in it;
but at length I observed a paper patch of the same colour as
the wainscot, which I took to conceal some flaw: but then it
was so high, that I was obliged to stand upon a chair to 
reach it, which I did as softly as possibly, and, with a point
of a bodkin, soon pierc'd it.  And now, applying my eye close,
I commanded the room perfectly, and could see my two young
sparks romping and pulling one another about, entirely, to my
     The eldest might be, on my nearest guess, towards nine-
teen, a tall comely young man, in a white fustian frock, with
     The youngest could not be above seventeen, fair, ruddy,
compleatly well made, and to say the truth, a sweet pretty
stripling: he was--I fancy, too, a country-lad, by his dress,
which was a green plush frock and breeches of the same, white
waistcoat and stockings, a jockey cap, with his yellowish
     But after a look of circumspection, which I saw the
eldest cast every way round the room, probably in too much
hurry and heat not to overlook the very small opening I was
posted at, especially at the height it was, whilst my eye 
close to it kept the light from shining through and betraying
it, he said something to his companion and presently chang'd
     For now the elder began to embrace, to press and kiss the
younger, to put his hands into his bosom, and give him such
manifest signs of an amorous intention, as made me conclude 
the other to be a girl in disguise: a mistake that nature kept
me in countenance for, for she had certainly made one, when 
     In the rashness then of their age, and bent as they were
to accomplish their project of preposterous pleasure, at the
risk of the very worst of consequences, where a discovery was
nothing less than improbable, they now proceeded to such
     The criminal scene they acted, I had the patience to see
to an end, purely that I might gather more facts and certainly
against them in my design to do their deserts instance jus-
tice; and accordingly, when they had readjusted themselves, 
and were preparing to go out, burning as I was with rage and
indignation, I jumped down from the chair, in order to raise
the house upon them, but with such an unlucky impetuosity, 
that some nail or ruggedness in the floor caught my foot, and
flung me on my face with such violence that I fell senseless
on the ground, and must have lain there some time e'er any
one came to my relief: so that they, alarmed, I suppose, by
the noise of my fall, had more than the necessary time to
make a safe retreat.  This they effected, as I learnt, with a
precipitation nobody could account for, till, when come to
myself, and compos'd enough to speak, I acquainted those of
the house with the whole transaction I had been evidence to.
     When I came home again, and told Mrs. Cole this adven-
ture, she very sensibly observ'd to me that there was no doubt
of due vengeance one time of other overtaking these miscre-
ants, however they might escape for the present; and that, had
I been the temporal instrument of it, I should have been at 
least put to a great deal more trouble and confusion that I
imagined; that, as to the thing itself, the less said of it 
was the better; but that though she might be suspected of
partiality, from its being the common cause of woman-kind, out
of whose mouths this practice tended to take something more
than bread, yet she protested against any mixture of passion,
with a declaration extorted from her by pure regard to truth;
which was that whatever effect this infamous passion had in
other ages and other countries, it seem'd a peculiar blessing
on our air and climate, that there was a plague-spot visibly
imprinted on all that are tainted with it, in this nation at
least; for that among numbers of that stamp whom she had
known, or at least were universally under the scandalous sus-
picion of it, she would not name an exception hardly of one
of them, whose character was not, in all other respects, the
most worthless and despicable that could be, stript of all
the manly virtues of their own sex, and fill'd up with only
the worst vices and follies of ours: that, in fine, they were
scarce less execrable than ridiculous in their monstrous in-
consistence, of loathing and condemning women, and all at the
same time apeing all their manners, air, lips, skuttle, and,
in general, all their little modes of affectation, which be-
come them at least better than they do these unsex'd male-
     But here, washing my hands of them, I re-plunge into the
stream of my history, into which I may very properly ingraft
a terrible sally of Louisa's, since I had some share in it
myself, and have besides engag'd myself to relate it, in point
of countenance to poor Emily.  It will add, too, one more
example to thousands, in confirmation of the maxim that when
women get once out of compass, there are no lengths of licen-
     One morning then, that both Mrs. Cole and Emily were gone
out for the day, and only Louisa and I (not to mention the 
house-maid) were left in charge of the house, whilst we were
loitering away the time in looking through the shop windows,
the son of a poor woman, who earned very hard bread indeed by
mending stockings, in a stall in the neighbourhood, offer'd us
some nosegays, ring'd round a small basket; by selling of 
which the poor boy eked out his mother's maintenance of them
both: nor was he fit for any other way of livelihood, since he
was not only a perfect changeling, or idiot, but stammer'd so
that there was no understanding even those sounds his half-
dozen, at most, animal ideas prompted him to utter.
     The boys and servants in the neighbourhood had given him
the nick-name of Good-natured Dick, from the soft simpleton's
doing everything he was bid at the first word, and from his
naturally having no turn to mischief; then, by the way, he 
was perfectly well made, stout, clean-limb'd, tall of his age,
as strong as a horse and, withal, pretty featur'd; so that he
was not, absolutely, such a figure to be snuffled at neither,
if your nicety could, in favour of such essentials, have dis-
pens'd with a face unwashed, hair tangled for want of comb-
ing, and so ragged a plight, that he might have disputed
points of shew with e'er a heathen philosopher of them all.
     This boy we had often seen, and bought his flowers, out
of pure compassion, and nothing more; but just at this time
as he stood presenting us his basket, a sudden whim, a start
of wayward fancy, seiz'd Louisa; and, without consulting me,
she calls him in, and beginning to examine his nosegays,
culls out two, one for herself, another for me, and pulling
out half a crown, very currently gives it him to change, as
if she had really expected he could have changed it: but the
boy, scratching his head, made his signs explaining his in-
ability in place of words, which he could not, with all his
     Louisa, at this, says:  "Well, my lad, come up-stairs
with me, and I will give you your due," winking at the same
time to me, and beckoning me to accompany her, which I did,
securing first the street-door, that by this means, together
with the shop, became wholly the care of the faithful house-
     As we went up, Louisa whispered to me that she had con-
ceiv'd a strange longing to be satisfy'd, whether the general
rule held good with regard to this changeling, and how far
nature had made him amends, in her best bodily gifts, for her
denial of the sublimer intellectual ones; begging, at the
same time, my assistance in procuring her this satisfaction.
A want of complaisance was never my vice, and I was so far
from opposing this extravagant frolic, that now, bit with the
same maggot, and my curiosity conspiring with hers, I enter'd
     Consequently, as soon as we came into Louisa's bed-
chamber, whilst she was amusing him with picking out his
nosegays, I undertook the lead, and began the attack.  As it
was not then very material to keep much measures with a mere
natural, I made presently very free with him, though at my
first motion of meddling, his surprize and confusion made
him receive my advances but aukwardly: nay, insomuch that he
bashfully shy'd, and shy'd back a little; till encouraging
him with my eyes, plucking him playfully by the hair, sleeking
his cheeks, and forwarding my point by a number of little
wantonness, I soon turn'd him familiar, and gave nature her
sweetest alarm: so that arous'd, and beginning to feel him-
self, we could, amidst all the innocent laugh and grin I had
provoked him into, perceive the fire lighting in his eyes,
and, diffusing over his cheeks, blend its glow with that of
his blushes.  The emotion in short of animal pleasure glar'd
distinctly in the simpleton's countenance; yet, struck with
the novelty of the scene, he did not know which way to look
or move; but tame, passive, simpering, with his mouth half
open in stupid rapture, stood and tractably suffer'd me to
do what I pleased with him.  His basket was dropt out of his
     I had now, through more than one rent, discovered and
felt his thighs, the skin of which seemed the smoother and
fairer for the coarseness, and even dirt of his dress, as
the teeth of Negroes seem the whiter for the surrounding
black; and poor indeed of habit, poor of understanding, he
was, however, abundantly rich in personal treasures, such as
flesh, firm, plump, and replete with the juices of youth,
and robust well-knit limbs.  My fingers too had now got with-
in reach of the true, the genuine sensitive plant, which,
instead of shrinking from the touch, joys to meet it, and
swells and vegetates under it: mine pleasingly informed me
that matters were so ripe for the discovery we meditated,
that they were too mighty for the confinement they were ready
to break.  A waistband that I unskewer'd, and a rag of a shirt
that I removed, and which could not have cover'd a quarter of
it, revealed the whole of the idiot's standard of distinction,
erect, in full pride and display: but such a one! it was posi-
tively of so tremendous a size, that prepared as we were to
see something extraordinary, it still, out of measure, sur-
pass'd our expectation, and astonish'd even me, who had not
been used to trade in trifles.  In fine, it might have answer-
ed very well the making a show of; its enormous head seemed,
in hue and size, not unlike a common sheep's heart; then you
might have troll'd dice securely along the broad back of the
body of it; the length of it too was prodigious; then the rich
appendage of the treasure-bag beneath, large in proportion,
gather'd adn crisp'd up round in shallow furrows, helped to 
fill the eye, and complete the proof of his being a natural,
not quite in vain; since it was full manifest that he inherit-
ed, and largely too, the prerogative of majesty which distin-
guishes that otherwise most unfortunate condition, and gives
rise to the vulgar saying "A fool's bauble is a lady's play-
fellow."  Not wholly without reason: for, generally speaking,
it is in love as it is in war, where longest weapon carries
it.  Nature, in short, had done so much for him in those
parts, that she perhaps held herself acquitted in doing so
     For my part, who had sincerely no intention to push the
joke further than simply satisfying my curiosity with the
sight of it alone, I was content, in spite of the temptation
that star'd me in the face, with having rais'd a May-pole
for another to hang a garland on: for, by this time, easily
reading Louisa's desires in her wishful eyes, I acted the
commodious part and made her, who sought no better sport,
significant terms of encouragement to go through-stitch with
her adventure; intimating too that I would stay and see fair
play: in which, indeed, I had in view to humour a new-born
curiosity, to observe what appearances active nature would put
on in a natural, in the course of this her darling operation.
     Louisa, whose appetite was up, and who, like the indus-
trious bee, was, it seems, not above gathering the sweets of
so rare a flower, tho' she found it planted on a dunghill,
was but too readily disposed to take the benefit of my
cession.  Urg'd then strongly by her own desires, and em-
bolden'd by me, she presently determined to risk a trial of
parts with the idiot, who was by this time nobly inflam'd
for her purpose, by all the irritations we had used to put
the principles of pleasure effectually into motion, and to
wind up the springs of its organ to their supreme pitch; and
it stood accordingly stiff and straining, ready to burst with
the blood and spirits that swelled it . . . to a bulk!  No!
     Louisa then, taking and holding the fine handle that
so invitingly offer'd itself, led the ductile youth by that
master-tool of his, as she stept backward towards the bed; 
which he joyfully gave way to, under the incitations of in-
stinct and palpably deliver'd up to the goad of desire.
     Stopped then by the bed, she took the fall she lov'd,
and lean'd to the most, gently backward upon it, still hold-
ing fast what she held, and taking care to give her cloaths
a convenient toss up, so that her thighs duly disclos'd, and
elevated, laid open all the outward prospect of the treasury
of love: the rose-lipt overture presenting the cock-pit so
fair, that it was not in nature even for a natural to miss it.
Nor did he, for Louisa, fully bent on grappling with it, and
impatient of dalliance or delay, directed faithfully the point
of the battering-piece, and bounded up with a rage of so vora-
cious appetite, to meet and favour the thrust of insertion,
that the fierce activity on both sides effected it with such
pain of distention, that Louisa cry'd out violently that she
was hurt beyond bearing, that she was killed.  But it was too
late: the storm was up, and force was on her to give way to
it; for now the man-machine, strongly work'd upon by the sen-
sual passion, felt so manfully his advantages and superiority,
felt withal the sting of pleasure so intolerable, that madden-
ing with it, his joys began to assume a character of furious-
ness which made me tremble for the too tender Louisa.  He
seemed, at this juncture, greater than himself; his counten-
ance, before so void of meaning, or expression, now grew big
with the importance of the act he was upon.  In short, it was
not now that he was to be play'd the fool with.  But, what is
pleasant enough, I myself was aw'd into a sort of respect for
him, by the comely terrors his motions dressed him in: his 
eyes shooting sparks of fire; his face glowing with ardours
that gave another life to it; his teeth churning; his whole
frame agitated with a raging ungovernable impetuosity: all
sensibly betraying the formidable fierceness with which the
genial instinct acted upon him.  Butting then and goring all
before him, and mad and wild like an over-driven steer, he
ploughs up the tender furrow, all insensible to Louisa's com-
plaints; nothing can stop, nothing can keep out a fury like
his: with which, having once got its head in, its blind rage
soon made way for the rest, piercing, rending, and breaking
open all obstructions.  The torn, split, wounded girl cries,
struggles, invokes me to her rescue, and endeavours to get
from under the young savage, or shake him off, but alas! in
vain: her breath might as soon have still'd or stemm'd a storm
in winter, as all her strength have quell'd his rough assault,
or put him out of his course.  And indeed, all her efforts and
struggles were manag'd with such disorder, that they serv'd 
rather to entangle, and fold her the faster in the twine of
his boisterous arms; so that she was tied to the stake, and 
oblig'd to fight the match out, if she died for it.  For his
part, instinct-ridden as he was, the expressions of his animal
passion, partaking something of ferocity, were rather worrying
than kisses, intermix'd with eager ravenous love-bites on her
cheeks and neck, the prints of which did not wear out for some
     Poor Louisa, however, bore up at length better than could
have been expected; and though she suffer'd, and greatly too,
yet, ever true to the good old cause, she suffer'd with plea-
sure and enjoyed her pain.  And soon now, by dint of an en-
rag'd enforcement, the brute-machine, driven like a whirl-
wind, made all smoke again, and wedging its way up, to the
utmost extremity, left her, in point of penetration, nothing
     "Gorg'd with the dearest morsel of the earth,"
                                         (Shakespeare.)
Louisa lay, pleas'd to the heart, pleas'd to her utmost capa-
city of being so, with every fibre in those parts, stretched
almost to breaking, on a rack of joy, whilst the instrument
of all this overfulness searched her senses with its sweet
excess, till the pleasure gained upon her so, its point stung
her so home, that catching at length the rage from her fur-
ious driver and sharing the riot of his wild rapture, she
went wholly out of her mind into that favourite part of her
body, the whole intenseness of which was so fervously fill'd,
and employ'd: there alone she existed, all lost in those de-
lirious transports, those extasies of the senses, which her
winking eyes, the brighten'd vermilion of her lips and cheeks,
and sighs of pleasure deeply fetched, so pathetically ex-
press'd.  In short, she was now as mere a machine as much
wrought on, and had her motions as little at her own command
as the natural himself, who thus broke in upon her, made her
feel with a vengeance his tempestuous tenderness, and the
force of the mettle he battered with; their active loins
quivered again with the violence of their conflict, till the
surge of pleasure, foaming and raging to a height, drew down
the pearly shower that was to allay this hurricane.  The
purely sensitive idiot then first shed those tears of joy that
attend its last moments, not without an agony of delight and
even almost a roar of rapture, as the gush escaped him; so
sensibly too for Louisa, that she kept him faithful company,
going off, in consent, with the old symptoms: a delicious
delirium, a tremulous convulsive shudder, and the critical
dying Oh!  And now, on his getting off, she lay pleasure-
drench'd, and re-gorging its essential sweets; but quite
spent, and gasping for breath, without other sensation of
life than in those exquisite vibrations that trembled yet on
the strings of delight, which had been too intensively
touched, and which nature had been so intensly stirred with,
     As for the changeling, whose curious engine had been 
thus successfully played off, his shift of countenance and 
gesture had even something droll, or rather tragi-comic in
it: there was now an air of sad repining foolishness, super-
added to his natural one of no-meaning and idiotism, as he
stood with his label of manhood, now lank, unstiffen'd, be-
calm'd, and flapping against his thighs, down which it reach'd 
half-way, terrible even in its fall, whilst under the dejec-
tion of spirit and flesh, which naturally followed, his eyes,
by turns, cast down towards his struck standard, or piteously
lifted to Louisa, seemed to require at her hands what he had 
so sensibly parted from to her, and now ruefully miss'd.  But
the vigour of nature, soon returning, dissipated the blast of
faintness which the common law of enjoyment had subjected him
to; and now his basket re-became his main concern, which I 
look'd for, and brought him, whilst Louisa restor'd his dress
to its usual condition, and afterwards pleased him perhaps
more by taking all his flowers off his hands, and paying him,
at his rate, for them, than if she had embarrass'd him by a
present that he would have been puzzled to account for, and
     Whether she ever return'd to the attack I know not, and,
to say the truth, I believe not.  She had had her freak out,
and had pretty plentifully drown'd her curiosity in a glut of
pleasure, which, as it happened, had no other consequence
than that the lad, who retain'd only a confused memory of the
transaction, would, when he saw her, for some time after, 
express a grin of joy and familiarity, after his idiot manner,
and soon forgot her in favour of the next woman, tempted, on
     Louisa herself did not long outstay this adventure at
Mrs. Cole's (to whom, by-the-bye, we took care not to boast
of our exploit, till all fear of consequences were clearly
over): for an occasion presenting itself of proving her
passion for a young fellow, at the expense of her discretion,
proceeding all in character, she pack'd up her toilet at half
a day's warning and went with him abroad, since which I
entirely lost sight of her, and it never fell in my way to
     But a few days after she had left us, two very pretty
young gentlemen, who were Mrs. Cole's especial favourites,
and free of her academy, easily obtain'd her consent for
Emily's and my acceptance of a party of pleasure at a little
but agreeable house belonging to one of them, situated not
     Everything being settled, and it being a fine summer-
day, but rather of the warmest, we set out after dinner, and
got to our rendez-vous about four in the afternoon; where,
landing at the foot of a neat, joyous pavillion, Emily and I
were handed into it by our squires, and there drank tea with
a cheerfulness and gaiety that the beauty of the prospect, 
the serenity of the weather, and the tender politeness of our
     After tea, and taking a turn in the garden, my particu-
lar, who was the master of the house, and had in no sense
schem'd this party of pleasure for a dry one, propos'd to us,
with that frankness which his familiarity at Mrs. Cole's
entitled him to, as the weather was excessively hot, to bathe
together, under a commodious shelter that he had prepared
expressly for that purpose, in a creek of the river, with
which a side-door of the pavilion immediately communicated,
and where we might be sure of having our diversion out, safe
     Emily, who never refus'd anything, and I, who ever
delighted in bathing, and had no exception to the person who
propos'd it, or to those pleasures it was easy to guess it
implied, took care, on this occasion, not to wrong our
training at Mrs. Cole's, and agreed to it with as good a
grace as we could.  Upon which, without loss of time, we
return'd instantly to the pavilion, one door of which open'd
into a tent, pitch'd before it, that with its marquise,
formed a pleasing defense against the sun, or the weather,
and was besides as private as we could wish.  The lining of
it, imbossed cloth, represented a wild forest-foliage, from
the top down to the sides, which, in the same stuff, were
figur'd with fluted pilasters, with their spaces between
fill'd with flower-vases, the whole having a gay effect upon
     Then it reached sufficiently into the water, yet con-
tain'd convenient benches round it, on the dry ground, either
to keep our cloaths, or . . ., or . . ., in short, for more
uses than resting upon.  There was a side-table too, loaded
with sweetmeats, jellies, and other eatables, and bottles of
wine and cordials, by way of occasional relief from any raw-
ness, or chill of the water, or from any faintness from what-
ever cause; and in fact, my gallant, who understood chere
entiere perfectly, and who, for taste (even if you would not
approve this specimen of it) might have been comptroller of
pleasures to a Roman emperor, had left no requisite towards
     As soon as we had look'd round this inviting spot, and
every preliminary of privacy was duly settled, strip was the
word: when the young gentlemen soon dispatch'd the undressing
each his partner and reduced us to the naked confession of
all those secrets of person which dress generally hides, and
which the discovery of was, naturally speaking, not to our
disadvantage.  Our hands, indeed, mechanically carried towards
the most interesting part of us, screened, at first, all from
the tufted cliff downwards, till we took them away at their
desire, and employed them in doing them the same office, of
helping off with their cloaths; in the process of which, there
pass'd all the little wantonnesses and frolicks that you may
     As for my spark, he was presently undressed, all to his
shirt, the fore-lappet of which as he lean'd languishingly on
me, he smilingly pointed to me to observe, as it bellied out,
or rose and fell, according to the unruly starts of the mo-
tion behind it; but it was soon fix'd, for now taking off his
shirt, and naked as a Cupid, he shew'd it me at so upright a
stand, as prepar'd me indeed for his application to me for
instant ease; but, tho' the sight of its fine size was fit
enough to fire me, the cooling air, as I stood in this state
of nature, joined to the desire I had of bathing first, en-
abled me to put him off, and tranquillize him, with the re-
mark that a little suspense would only set a keener edge on
the pleasure.  Leading then the way, and shewing our friends
an example of continency, which they were giving signs of
losing respect to, we went hand in hand into the stream, till
it took us up to our neck, where the no more than grateful
coolness of the water gave my senses a delicious refreshment
from the sultriness of the season, and made more alive, more
happy in myself, and, in course, more alert, and open to
     Here I lav'd and wanton'd with the water, or sportively
play'd with my companion, leaving Emily to deal with hers at
discretion.  Mine, at length, not content with making me take
the plunge over head and ears, kept splashing me, and provok-
ing me with all the little playful tricks he could devise, 
and which I strove not to remain in his debt for.  We gave,
in short, a loose to mirth; and now, nothing would serve him
but giving his hands the regale of going over every part of
me, neck, breast, belly, thighs, and all the et cetera, so
dear to the imagination, under the pretext of washing and
rubbing them; as we both stood in the water, no higher now
than the pit of our stomachs, and which did not hinder him
from feeling, and toying with that leak that distinguishes 
our sex, and it so wonderfully water-tight: for his fingers,
in vain dilating and opening it, only let more flame than
water into it, be it said without a figure.  At the same time
he made me feel his own engine, which was so well wound up, 
as to stand even the working in water, and he accordingly 
threw one arm round my neck, and was endeavouring to get the
better of that harsher construction bred by the surrounding
fluid; and had in effect won his way so far as to make me
sensible of the pleasing stretch of those nether-lips, from
the in-driving machine; when, independent of my not liking 
that aukward mode of enjoyment, I could not help interrupt-
ing him, in order to become joint spectators of a plan of
joy, in hot operation between Emily and her partner; who
impatient of the fooleries and dalliance of the bath, had led
his nymph to one of the benches on the green bank, where he 
was very cordially proceeding to teach her the difference be-
     There, setting her on his knee, and gliding one hand over
the surface of that smooth polish'd snow-white skin of hers,
which now doubly shone with a dew-bright lustre, and presented
to the touch something like what one would imagine of animated
ivory, especially in those ruby-nippled globes, which the
touch is so fond of and delights to make love to, with the 
other he was lusciously exploring the sweet secret of nature,
in order to make room for a stately piece of machinery, that
stood uprear'd, between her thighs, as she continued sitting
on his lap, and pressed hard for instant admission, which the
tender Emily, in a fit of humour deliciously protracted, af-
fecting to decline, and elude the very pleasure she sigh'd
for, but in a style of waywardness so prettily put on, and
managed, as to render it ten times more poignant; then her
eyes, all amidst the softest dying languishment, express'd at
once a mock denial and extreme desire, whilst her sweetness 
was zested with a coyness so pleasingly provoking, her moods
of keeping him off were so attractive, that they redoubled 
the impetuous rage with which he cover'd her with kisses: and
the kisses that, whilst she seemed to shy from or scuffle for,
the cunning wanton contrived such sly returns of, as were 
doubtless the sweeter for the gust she gave them, of being 
     Thus Emily, who knew no art but that which nature itself,
in favour of her principal end, pleasure, had inspir'd her 
with, the art of yielding, coy'd it indeed, but coy'd it to
the purpose; for with all her straining, her wrestling, and
striving to break from the clasp of his arms, she was so far
wiser yet than to mean it, that in her struggles, it was
visible she aim'd at nothing more than multiplying points of
touch with him, and drawing yet closer the folds that held
them every where entwined, like two tendrils of a vine inter-
curling together: so that the same effect, as when Louisa
strove in good earnest to disengage from the idiot, was now
     Mean while, their emersion out of the cold water had 
caused a general glow, a tender suffusion of heighten'd
carnation over their bodies; both equally white and smooth-
skinned; so that as their limbs were thus amorously inter-
woven, in sweet confusion, it was scarce possible to distin-
guish who they respectively belonged to, but for the brawnier,
     In a little time, however, the champion was fairly in
with her, and had tied at all points the true lover's knot;
when now, adieu all the little refinements of a finessed re-
luctance; adieu the friendly feint!  She was presently driven
forcibly out of the power of using any art; and indeed, what
art must not give way, when nature, corresponding with her
assailant, invaded in the heart of her capital and carried by
storm, lay at the mercy of the proud conqueror who had made 
his entry triumphantly and completely?  Soon, however, to be-
come a tributary: for the engagement growing hotter and
hotter, at close quarters, she presently brought him to the
pass of paying down the dear debt to nature; which she had no
sooner collected in, but, like a duellist who has laid his
antagonist at his feet, when he has himself received a mortal
wound, Emily had scarce time to plume herself upon her vic-
tory, but, shot with the same discharge, she, in a loud ex-
piring sigh, in the closure of her eyes, the stretch-out of
her limbs, and a remission of her whole frame, gave manifest
     For my part, who had not with the calmest patience stood
in the water all this time, to view this warm action, I lean'd
tenderly on my gallant, and at the close of it, seemed'd to 
ask him with my eyes what he thought of it; but he, more eager
to satisfy me by his actions than by words or looks, as we 
shoal'd the water towards the shore, shewed me the staff of 
love so intensely set up, that had not even charity beginning
at home in this case, urged me to our mutual relief, it would
have been cruel indeed to have suffered the youth to burst 
with straining, when the remedy was so obvious and so near at
     Accordingly we took to a bench, whilst Emily and her
spark, who belonged it seems to the sea, stood at the side-
board, drinking to our good voyage: for, as the last observ'd,
we were well under weigh, with a fair wind up channel, and
full-freighted; nor indeed were we long before we finished our
trip to Cythera, and unloaded in the old haven; but, as the
circumstances did not admit of much variation, I shall spare
     At the same time, allow me to place you here an excuse
I am conscious of owing you, for having, perhaps, too much
affected the figurative style; though surely, it can pass no-
where more allowably than in a subject which is so properly 
the province of poetry, nay, is poetry itself, pregnant with
every flower of imagination and loving metaphors, even were
not the natural expressions, for respects of fashion and
     Resuming now my history, you may please to know that
what with a competent number of repetitions, all in the same
strain (and, by-the-bye, we have a certain natural sense that 
those repetitions are very much to the taste), what with a
circle of pleasures delicately varied, there was not a moment
lost to joy all the time we staid there, till late in the 
night we were re-escorted home by our squires, who delivered
us safe to Mrs. Cole, with generous thanks for our company.
     This too was Emily's last adventure in our way: for 
scarce a week after, she was, by an accident too trivial to
detail to you the particulars, found out by her parents, who
were in good circumstances, and who had been punish'd for
their partiality to their son, in the loss of him, occasion'd
by a circumstance of their over-indulgence to his appetite;
upon which the so long engross'd stream of fondness, running
violently in favour of this lost and inhumanly abandon'd child
whom if they had not neglected enquiry about, they might long
before have recovered.  They were now so overjoyed at the re-
trieval of her, that, I presume, it made them much less strict
in examining the bottom of things: for they seem'd very glad
to take for granted, in the lump, everything that the grave 
and decent Mrs. Cole was pleased to pass upon them; and soon
afterwards sent her, from the country, a handsome acknowledge-
     But it was not so easy to replace to our community the
loss of so sweet a member of it: for, not to mention her
beauty, she was one of those mild, pliant characters that if
one does not entirely esteem, one can scarce help loving,
which is not such a bad compensation neither.  Owing all her
weakness to good-nature, and an indolent facility that kept
her too much at the mercy of first impressions, she had just
sense enough to know that she wanted leading-strings, and
thought herself so much obliged to any who would take the 
pains to think for her, and guide her, that with a very little
management, she was capable of being made a most agreeable,
nay, a most virtuous wife: for vice, it is probable, had never
been her choice, or her fate, if it had not been for occasion,
or example, or had she not depended less upon herself than 
upon her circumstances.  This presumption her conduct after-
wards verified: for presently meeting with a match that was
ready cut and dry for her, with a neighbour's son of her own
rank, and a young man of sense and order, who took her as the
widow of one lost at sea (for so it seems one of her gallants,
whose name she had made free with, really was), she naturally
struck into all the duties of their domestic life with as much
constancy and regularity, as if she had never swerv'd from a
     These desertions had, however, now so far thinned Mrs.
Cole's brood that she was left with only me like a hen with
one chicken; but tho' she was earnestly entreated and encou-
rag'd to recruit her corps, her growing infirmities, and,
above all, the tortures of a stubborn hip-gout, which she 
found would yield to no remedy, determin'd her to bread up her
business and retire with a decent pittance into the country,
where I promis'd myself nothing so sure, as my going down to 
live with her as soon as I had seen a little more of life and
improv'd my small matters into a competency that would create
in me an independence on the world: for I was, now, thanks to
Mrs. Cole, wise enough to keep that essential in view.
     Thus was I then to lose my faithful preceptress, as did
the Philosophers of the town the White Crow of her profession.
For besides that she never ransacked her customers, whose
taste too she ever studiously consulted, besides that she
never racked her pupils with unconscionable extortions, nor
ever put their hard earnings, as she call'd them, under the
contribution of poundage.  She was a severe enemy to the 
seduction for innocence, and confin'd her acquisitions solely
to those unfortunate young women, who, having lost it, were
but the juster objects of compassion: among these, indeed,
she pick'd but such as suited her views and taking them under
her protection, rescu'd them from the danger of the publick
sinks of ruin and misery, to place, or do for them, well or
ill, in the manner you have seen.  Having then settled her
affairs, she set out on her journey, after taking the most
tender leave of me, and at the end of some excellent instruc-
tions, recommending me to myself, with an anxiety perfectly
maternal.  In short, she affected me so much, that I was not
presently reconcil'd to myself for suffering her at any rate
to go without me; but fate had, it seems, otherwise dispos'd
     I had, on my separation from Mrs. Cole, taken a pleasant
convenient house at Marybone, but easy to rent and manage from
its smallness, which I furnish'd neatly and modestly.  There, 
with a reserve of eight hundred pounds, the fruit of my defer-
ence to Mrs. Cole's counsels, exclusive of cloaths, some
jewels, some plate, I saw myself in purse for a long time, to
wait without impatience for what the chapter of accidents
     Here, under the new character of a young gentle-woman
whose husband was gone to sea, I had mark'd me out such lines
of life and conduct, as leaving me at a competent liberty to
pursue my views either out of pleasure or fortune, bounded me
nevertheless strictly within the rules od decency and discre-
tion: a disposition in which you cannot escape observing a
     I was scarce, however, well warm in my new abode, when
going out one morning pretty early to enjoy the freshness of
it, in the pleasing outlet of the fields, accompanied only by
a maid, whom I had newly hired, as we were carelessly walking
among the trees we were alarmed with the noise of a violent
coughing: turning our heads towards which, we distinguish'd a
plain well-dressed elderly gentleman, who, attack'd with a
sudden fit, was so much overcome as to be forc'd to give way 
to it and sit down at the foot of a tree, where he seemed 
suffocating with the severity of it, being perfectly black in
the face: not less mov'd than frighten'd with which, I flew
on the instant to his relief, and using the rote of practice
I had observ'd on the like occasion, I loosened his cravat
and clapped him on the back; but whether to any purpose, or
whether the cough had had its course, I know not, but the fit
immediately went off; and now recover'd to his speech and 
legs, he returned me thanks with as much emphasis as if I had
sav'd his life.  This naturally engaging a conversation, he
acquainted me where he lived, which was at a considerable
distance from where I met with him, and where he had stray'd
insensibly on the same intention of a morning walk.
     He was, as I afterwards learn'd in the course of the
intimacy which this little accident gave birth to, an old
bachelor, turn'd of sixty, but of a fresh vigorous complexion,
insomuch that he scarce marked five and forty, having never
rack'd his constitution by permitting his desires to overtax
     As to his birth and condition, his parents, honest and
fail'd mechanicks, had, by the best traces he could get of
them, left him an infant orphan on the parish; so that it was
from a charity-school, that, by honesty and industry, he made
his way into a merchant's counting-house; from whence, being
sent to a house in CADIZ, he there, by his talents and acti-
vity, acquired a fortune, but an immense one, with which he
returned to his native country; where he could not, however,
so much as fish out one single relation out of the obscurity
he was born in.  Taking then a taste for retirement, and
pleas'd to enjoy life, like a mistress in the dark, he flowed
his days in all the ease of opulence, without the least parade
of it; and, rather studying the concealment than the shew of a
fortune, looked down on a world he perfectly knew; himself, to
     But, as I propose to devote a letter entirely to the
pleasure of retracing to you all the particulars of my ac-
quaintance with this ever, to me, memorable friend, I shall,
in this, transiently touch on no more than may serve, as
mortar to cement, to form the connection of my history, and
to obviate your surprize that one of my high blood and relish
of life should count a gallant of threescore such a catch.
     Referring then to a more explicit narrative, to explain
by what progressions our acquaintance, certainly innocent at
first, insensibly changed nature, and ran into unplatonic
lengths, as might well be expected from one of my condition
of life, and above all, from that principle of electricity
that scarce ever fails of producing fire when the sexes meet.
I shall only her acquaint you, that as age had not subdued 
his tenderness for our sex, neither had it robbed him of the
power of pleasing, since whatever he wanted in the bewitching
charms of youth, he aton'd for, or supplemented with the ad-
vantages of experience, the sweetness of his manners, and
above all, his flattering address in touching the heart, by
an application to the understanding.  From him it was I first
learn'd, to any purpose, and not without infinite pleasure,
that I had such a portion of me worth bestowing some regard
on; from him I received my first essential encouragement, and
instructions how to put it in that train of cultivation, which
I have since pushed to the little degree of improvement you
see it at; he it was, who first taught me to be sensible that
the pleasures of the mind were superior to those of the body;
at the same time, that they were so far from obnoxious to, or
incompatible with each other, that, besides the sweetness in
the variety and transition, the one serv'd to exalt and per-
fect the taste of the other to a degree that the senses alone
     Himself a rational pleasurist, as being much too wise to
be asham'd of the pleasures of humanity, loved me indeed, but
loved me with dignity; in a mean equally remov'd from the
sourness, of forwardness, by which age is unpleasingly char-
acteriz'd, and from that childish silly dotage that so often
disgraces it, and which he himself used to turn into ridicule,
and compare to an old goat affecting the frisk of a young kid.
     In short, everything that is generally unamiable in his
season of life was, in him, repair'd by so many advantages,
that he existed a proof, manifest at least to me, that it is
not out of the power of age to please, if it lays out to
please, and if, making just allowances, those in that class
do not forget that it must cost them more pains and attention
than what youth, the natural spring-time of joy, stands in
need of: as fruits out of season require proportionably more
     With this gentleman then, who took me home soon after
our acquaintance commenc'd, I lived near eight months; in
which time, my constant complaisance and docility, my atten-
tion to deserve his confidence and love, and a conduct, in
general, devoid of the least art and founded on my sincere
regard and esteem for him, won and attach'd him so firmly to
me, that, after having generously trusted me with a genteel,
independent settlement, proceeding to heap marks of affection
on me, he appointed me, by an authentick will, his sole
heiress and executrix: a disposition which he did not outlive
two months, being taken from me by a violent cold that he
contracted as he unadvisedly ran to the window on an alarm of
fire, at some streets distance, and stood there naked-breast-
ed, and exposed to the fatal impressions of a damp night-air.
     After acquitting myself of my duty towards my deceas'd 
benefactor, and paying him a tribute of unfeign'd sorrow,
which a little time chang'd into a most tender, grateful
memory of him that I shall ever retain, I grew somewhat com-
forted by the prospect that now open'd to me, if not of hap-
     I saw myself then in the full bloom and pride of youth
(for I was not yet nineteen) actually at the head of so large
a fortune, as it would have been even the height of impudence
in me to have raised my wishes, much more my hopes, to; and
that this unexpected elevation did not turn my head, I ow'd
to the pains my benefactor had taken to form and prepare me
for it, as I ow'd his opinion of my management of the vast
possessions he left me, to what he had observ'd of the pru-
dential economy I had learned under Mrs. Cole, of which the
reserve he saw I had made was a proof and encouragement to
     But, alas! how easily is the enjoyment of the greatest
sweets in life, in present possession, poisoned by the regret
of an absent one! but my regret was a mighty and just one,
since it had my only truly beloved Charles for its object.
     Given him up I had, indeed, compleatly, having never once
heard from him since our separation; which, as I found after-
wards, had been my misfortune, and not his neglect, for he
wrote me several letters which had all miscarried; but for-
gotten him I never had.  Amidst all my personal infidelities,
not one had made a pin's point impression on a heart impene-
     As soon, however, as I was mistress of this unexpected
fortune, I felt more than ever how dear he was to me, from
its insufficiency to make me happy, whilst he was not to
share it with me.  My earliest care, consequently, was to
endeavour at getting some account of him; but all my re-
searches produc'd me no more light than that his father had
been dead for some time, not so well as even with the world;
and that Charles had reached his port of destination in the
South-Seas, where, finding the estate he was sent to recover
dwindled to a trifle, by the loss of two ships in which the
bulk of his uncle's fortune lay, he was come away with the
small remainder, and might, perhaps, according to the best
advice, in a few months return to England, from whence he
had, at the time of this my inquiry, been absent two years
     You cannot conceive with what joy I embraced the hopes
thus given me of seeing the delight of my heart again.  But,
as the term of months was assigned it, in order to divert
and amuse my impatience for his return, after settling my
affairs with much ease and security, I set out on a journey
for Lancashire, with an equipage suitable to my fortune, and
with a design purely to revisit my place of nativity, for
which I could not help retaining a great tenderness; and might
naturally not be sorry to shew myself there, to the advantage
I was now in pass to do, after the report Esther Davis had
spread of my being spirited away to the plantations; for on
no other supposition could she account for the suppression of
myself to her, since her leaving me so abruptly at the inn.
Another favourite intention I had, to look out for my rela-
tions, though I had none besides distant ones, and prove a
benefactress to them.  Then Mrs. Cole's place of retirement
lying in my way, was not amongst the least of the pleasures I
     I had taken nobody with me but a discreet decent woman,
to figure it as my companion, besides my servants, and was
scarce got into an inn, about twenty miles from London, where
I was to sup and pass the night, when such a storm of wind 
and rain sprang up as made me congratulate myself on having
     This had continu'd a good half hour, when bethinking me
of some directions to be given to the coachman, I sent for
him, and not caring that his shoes should soil the very clean
parlour, in which the cloth was laid, I stept into the hall-
kitchen, where he was, and where, whilst I was talking to him,
I slantingly observ'd two horsemen driven in by the weather,
and both wringing wet; one of whom was asking if they could
not be assisted with a change, while their clothes were dried.
But, heavens! who can express what I felt at the sound of a
voice, ever present to my heart, and that is now rebounded at!
or when pointing my eyes towards the person it came from, they
confirm'd its information, in spite of so long an absence, and
of a dress one would have imagin'd studied for a disguise: a
horseman's great coat, with a stand-up cape, and his hat
flapp'd . . . but what could escape the piercing alertness of
a sense surely guided by love?  A transport then like mine was
above all consideration, or schemes of surprize; and I, that
instant, with the rapidity of the emotions that I felt the 
spur of, shot into his arms, crying out, as I threw mine round
his neck:  "My life! . . . my soul! . . . my Charles! . . ."
and without further power of speech, swoon'd away, under the
     Recover'd out of my entrancement, I found myself in my
charmer's arms, but in the parlour, surrounded by a crowd
which this event had gather'd round us, and which immediately,
on a signal from the discreet landlady, who currently took him
for my husband, clear'd the room, and desirably left us alone
to the raptures of this reunion; my joy at which had like to
have prov'd, at the expense of my life, power superior to that
     The first object then, that my eyes open'd on, was their
supreme idol, and my supreme wish Charles, on one knee, hold-
ing me fast by the hand and gazing on me with a transport of
fondness.  Observing my recovery, he attempted to speak, and
give vent to his patience of hearing my voice again, to
satisfy him once more that it was me; but the mightiness and
suddenness of the surprize, continuing to stun him, choked
his utterance: he could only stammer out a few broken, half
formed, faltering accents, which my ears greedily drinking
in, spelt, and put together, so as to make out their sense;
"After so long! . . . so cruel . . . an absence! . . . my
dearest Fanny! . . . can it? . . . can it be you? . . ."
stifling me at the same time with kisses, that, stopping my
mouth, at once prevented the answer that he panted for, and
increas'd the delicious disorder in which all my senses were
rapturously lost.  Amidst however, this crowd of ideas, and
all blissful ones, there obtruded only one cruel doubt, that
poison'd nearly all the transcendent happiness: and what was
it, but my dread of its being too excessive to be real?  I
trembled now with the fear of its being no more than a
dream, and of my waking out of it into the horrors of find-
ing it one.  Under this fond apprehension, imagining I could
not make too much of the present prodigious joy, before it
should vanish and leave me in the desert again, nor verify
its reality too strongly, I clung to him, I clasp'd him, as
if to hinder him from escaping me again:  "Where have you
been? . . . how could you . . . could you leave me? . . .
Say you are still mine . . . that you still love me . . .
and thus! thus!" (kissing him as if I would consolidate lips
with him!)  "I forgive you . . . forgive my hard fortune in
     All these interjections breaking from me, in that wild-
ness of expression that justly passes for eloquence in love, 
drew from him all the returns my fond heart could wish or
require.  Our caresses, our questions, our answers, for some
time observ'd no order; all crossing, or interrupting one
another in sweet confusion, whilst we exchang'd hearts at our
eyes, and renew'd the ratifications of a love unbated by time
or absence: not a breath, not a motion, not a gesture on
either side, but what was strongly impressed with it.  Our
hands, lock'd in each other, repeated the most passionate
squeezes, so that their fiery thrill went to the heart again.
     Thus absorbed, and concentre'd in this unutterable de-
light, I had not attended to the sweet author of it, being
thoroughly wet, and in danger of catching cold; when, in good
time, the landlady, whom the appearance of my equipage (which,
by-the-bye, Charles knew nothing of) had gain'd me an interest
in, for me and mine, interrupted us by bringing in a decent
shift of linen and cloaths, which now, somewhat recover'd into
a calmer composure by the coming in of a third person, I prest
him to take the benefit of, with a tender concern and anxiety
     The landlady leaving us again, he proceeded to shift; in
the act of which, tho' he proceeded with all that modesty
which became these first solemner instants of our re-meeting
after so long an absence, I could not contain certain snatches
of my eyes, lured by the dazzling discoveries of his naked
skin, that escaped him as he chang'd his linen, and which I
could not observe the unfaded life and complexion of without
emotions of tenderness and joy, that had himself too purely
for their object to partake of a loose or mistim'd desire.
     He was soon drest in these temporary cloaths, which 
neither fitted him now became the light my passion plac'd
him in, to me at least; yet, as they were on him, they look'd
extremely well, in virtue of that magic charm which love put 
into everything that he touch'd, or had relation to him: and
where, indeed, was that dress that a figure like this would
not give grace to?  For now, as I ey'd him more in detail, I
could not but observe the even favourable alteration which
the time of his absence had produced in his person.
     There were still the requisite lineaments, still the
same vivid vermilion and bloom reigning in his face: but now
the roses were more fully blown; the tan of his travels, and
a beard somewhat more distinguishable, had, at the expense
of no more delicacy than what he could well spare, given it
an air of becoming manliness and maturity, that symmetriz'd
nobly with that air of distinction and empire with which
nature had stamp'd it, in a rare mixture with the sweetness
of it; still nothing had he lost of that smooth plumpness of
flesh, which, glowing with freshness, blooms florid to the
eye, and delicious to the touch; then his shoulders were
grown more square, his shape more form'd, more portly, but
still free and airy.  In short, his figure show'd riper,
greater, and perfecter to the experienced eye than in his 
tender youth; and now he was not much more than two and
     In this interval, however, I pick'd out of the broken,
often pleasingly interrupted account of himself, that he was,
at that instant, actually on his road to London, in not a 
very paramount plight or condition, having been wreck'd on 
the Irish coast for which he had prematurely embark'd, and
lost the little all he had brought with him from the South
Seas; so that he had not till after great shifts and hard-
ships, in the company of his fellow-traveller, the captain,
got so far on his journey; that so it was (having heard of 
his father's death and circumstances) he had now the world 
to begin again, on a new account: a situation which he
assur'd me, in a vein of sincerity that, flowing from his
heart, penetrated mine, gave him to farther pain, than that
he had it not in his power to make me as happy as he could
wish.  My fortune, you will please to observe, I had not
enter'd upon any overture of, reserving to feast myself with
the surprize of it to him, in calmer instants.  And, as to 
my dress, it could give him no idea of the truth, not only
as it was mourning, but likewise in a style of plainness and 
simplicity that I had ever kept to with studied art.  He 
press'd me indeed tenderly to satisfy his ardent curiosity, 
both with regard to my past and present state of life since
his being torn away from me: but I had the address to elude
his questions by answers that, shewing his satisfaction at
no great distance, won upon him to waive his impatience, in 
favour of the thorough confidence he had in my not delaying
it, but for respects I should in good time acquaint him with.
     Charles, however, thus returned to my longing arms,
tender, faithful, and in health, was already a blessing too
mighty for my conception: but Charles in distress! . . .
Charles reduc'd, and broken down to his naked personal merit,
was such a circumstance, in favour of the sentiments I had 
for him, as exceeded my utmost desires; and accordingly I 
seemed so visibly charm'd, so out of time and measure pleas'd
at his mention of his ruin'd fortune, that he could account
for it no way, but that the joy of seeing him again had swal-
     In the mean time, my woman had taken all possible care
of Charles's travelling companion; and as supper was coming
in, he was introduc'd to me, when I receiv'd him as became my
regard for all of Charles's acquaintance or friends.
     We four then supp'd together, in the style of joy, con-
gratulation, and pleasing disorder that you may guess.  For
my part, though all these agitations had left me not the
least stomach but for that uncloying feast, the sight of my
ador'd youth, I endeavour'd to force it, by way of example
for him, who I conjectur'd must want such a recruit after 
riding; and, indeed, he ate like a traveller, but gaz'd at,
     After the cloth was taken away, and the hour of repose
came on, Charles and I were, without further ceremony, in 
quality of man and wife, shewn up together to a very handsome
apartment, and, all in course, the bed, they said, the best 
     And here, Decency, forgive me! if once more I violate
thy laws and keeping the curtains undrawn, sacrifice thee for
the last time to that confidence, without reserve, with which
I engaged to recount to you the most striking circumstances 
     As soon, then, as we were in the room together, left to
ourselves, the sight of the bed starting the remembrance of
our first joys, and the thought of my being instantly to
share it with the dear possessor of my virgin heart, mov'd
me so strongly, that it was well I lean'd upon him, or I
must have fainted again under the overpowering sweet alarm.
Charles saw into my confusion, and forgot his own, that was
scarce less, to apply himself to the removal of mine.
     But now the true refining passion had regain'd thorough
possession of me, with all its train of symptoms: a sweet
sensibility, a tender timidity, love-sick yearnings temper'd
with diffidence and modesty, all held me in a subjection of
soul, incomparably dearer to me than the liberty of heart 
which I had been long, too long! the mistress of, in the
course of those grosser gallantries, the consciousness of 
which now made me sigh with a virtuous confusion and regret.
No real virgin, in view of the nuptial bed, could give more
bashful blushes to unblemish'd innocence than I did to a
sense of guilt; and indeed I lov'd Charles too truly not to
     As I kept hesitating and disconcerted under this soft
distraction, Charles, with a fond impatience, took the pains
to undress me; and all I can remember amidst the flutter and
discomposure of my senses was some flattering exclamations of
joy and admiration, more specially at the feel of my breasts,
now set at liberty form my stays, and which panting and ris-
ing in tumultuous throbs, swell'd upon his dear touch, and
gave it the welcome pleasure of finding them well form'd, and
     I was soon laid in bed, and scarce languish'd an instant
for the darling partner of it, before he was undress'd and
got between the sheets, with his arms clasp'd round me, giv-
ing and taking, with gust inexpressible, a kiss of welcome,
that my heart rising to my lips stamp'd with its warmest
impression, concurring to by bliss, with that delicate and
voluptuous emotion which Charles alone had the secret to
excite, and which constitutes the very life, the essence of
     Meanwhile, two candles lighted on a side-table near us,
and a joyous wood-fire, threw a light into the bed that took
from one sense, of great importance to our joys, all pretext
for complaining of its being shut out of its share of them;
and indeed, the sight of my idolized youth was alone, from
the ardour with which I had wished for it, without other cir-
     But as action was now a necessity to desires so much on
edge as ours, Charles, after a very short prelusive dalliance,
lifting up my linen and his own, laid the broad treasures of
his manly chest close to my bosom, both beating with the
tenderest alarms: when now, the sense of his glowing body, in
naked touch with mine, took all power over my thoughts out of
my own disposal, and deliver'd up every faculty of the soul
to the sensiblest of joys, that affecting me infinitely more
with my distinction of the person than of the sex, now
brought my conscious heart deliciously into play: my heart,
which eternally constant to Charles, had never taken any part
in my occasional sacrifices to the calls of constitution,
complaisance, or interest.  But ah! what became of me, when
as the powers of solid pleasure thickened upon me, I could
not help feeling the stiff stake that had been adorn'd with
the trophies of my despoil'd virginity, bearing hard and
inflexible against one of my thighs, which I had not yet
opened, from a true principle of modesty, reviv'd by a pas-
sion too sincere to suffer any aiming at the false merit of
difficulty, or my putting on an impertinent mock coyness.
     I have, I believe, somewhere before remark'd, that the
feel of that favourite piece of manhood has, in the very na-
ture of it, something inimitably pathetic.  Nothing can be
dearer to the touch, nor can affect it with a more delicious 
sensation.  Think then! as a love thinks, what must be the
consummate transport of that quickest of our senses, in their
central seat too! when, after so long a deprival, it felt
itself re-inflam'd under the pressure of that peculiar scep-
ter-member which commands us all: but especially my darling,
elect from the face of the whole earth.  And now, at its
mightiest point of stiffness, it felt to me something so
subduing, so active, so solid and agreeable, that I know not
what name to give its singular impression: but the sentiment
of consciousness of its belonging to my supremely beloved
youth, gave me so pleasing an agitation, and work'd so
strongly on my soul, that it sent all its sensitive spirits
to that organ of bliss in me, dedicated to its reception.  
There, concentreing to a point, like rays in a burning glass,
they glow'd, they burnt with the intensest heat; the springs
of pleasure were, in short, wound up to such a pitch, I
panted now, with so exquisitely keen an appetite for the emi-
nent enjoyment that I was even sick with desire, and unequal
to support the combination of two distinct ideas, that de-
lightfully distracted me: for all the thought I was capable 
of, was that I was now in touch, at once, with the instrument
of pleasure, and the great-seal of love.  Ideas that, ming-
ling streams, pour'd such an ocean of intoxicating bliss on
a weak vessel, all too narrow to contain it, that I lay over-
whelm'd, absorbed, lost in an abyss of joy, and dying of
     Charles then rous'd me somewhat out of this extatic dis-
traction with a complaint softly murmured, amidst a crowd of
kisses, at the position, not so favourable to his desires, in
which I receiv'd his urgent insistance for admission, where 
that insistance was alone so engrossing a pleasure that it
made me inconsistently suffer a much dearer one to be kept 
out; but how sweet to correct such a mistake!  My thighs, now
obedient ot the intimations of love and nature, gladly dis-
close, and with a ready submission, resign up the soft gate-
way to the entrance of pleasure: I see, I feel the delicious 
velvet tip! . . . he enters me might and main, with . . . oh!
my pen drops from me here in the extasy now present to my 
faithful memory!  Description too deserts me, and delivers 
over a task, above its strength of wing, to the imagination:
but it must be an imagination exalted by such a flame as mine
that can do justice to that sweetest, noblest of all sensa-
tions, that hailed and accompany'd the stiff insinuation all
the way up, till it was at the end of its penetration, send-
ing up, through my eyes, the sparks of the love-fire that 
ran all over me and blaz'd in every vein and every pore of 
     I had now totally taken in love's true arrow from the 
point up to the feather, in that part, where making now new
wound, the lips of the original one of nature, which had
owed its first breathing to this dear instrument, clung, as
if sensible of gratitude, in eager suction round it, whilst
all its inwards embrac'd it tenderly with a warmth of gust,
a compressive energy, that gave it, in its way, the hearti-
est welcome in nature; every fibre there gathering tight
round it, and straining ambitiously to come in for its share
     As we were giving them a few moments of pause to the 
delectation of the senses, in dwelling with the highest
relish on this intimatest point of re-union, and chewing the
cud of enjoyment, the impatience natural to the pleasure soon
drove us into action.  Then began the driving tumult on his
side, and the responsive heaves on mine, which kept me up to
him; whilst, as our joys grew too great for utterance, the
organs of our voices, voluptuously intermixing, became organs
of the touch . . . and oh, that touch! how delicious! . . .
how poignantly luscious! . . . And now! now I felt to the 
heart of me! I felt the prodigious keen edge with which love,
presiding over this act, points the pleasure: love! that may
be styled the Attic salt of enjoyment; and indeed, without
it, the joy, great as it is, is still a vulgar one, whether
in a king or a beggar; for it is, undoubtedly, love alone 
     Thus happy, then, by the heart, happy by the senses, it
was beyond all power, even of thought, to form the conception 
of a greater delight than what I was now consummating the
     Charles, whose whole frame was convulsed with the agita-
tion of his rapture, whilst the tenderest fires trembled in
his eyes, all assured me of a prefect concord of joy, pene-
trated me so profoundly, touch'd me so vitally, took me so
much out of my own possession, whilst he seem'd himself so
much in mine, that in a delicious enthusiasm, I imagin'd such
a transfusion of heart and spirit, as that coalescing, and
making one body and soul with him, I was he, and he, me. 
     But all this pleasure tending, like life from its first
instants, towards its own dissolution, liv'd too fast not to 
bring on upon the spur its delicious moment of mortality; for
presently the approach of the tender agony discover'd itself
by its usual signals, that were quickly follow'd by my dear
love's emanation of himself that spun our, and shot, feel-
ingly indeed! up the ravish'd in-draught: where the sweetly
soothing balmy titillation opened all the juices of joy on my
side, which extatically in flow, help'd to allay the prurient
glow, and drown'd our pleasure for a while.  Soon, however,
to be on float again!  For Charles, true to nature's laws, in
one breath expiring and ejaculating, languish'd not long in
the dissolving trance, but recovering spirit again, soon gave
me to feel that the true-mettle springs of his instrument of
pleasure were, by love, and perhaps by a long vacation, wound
up too high to be let down by a single explosion: his stiff-
ness still stood my friend.  Resuming then the action afresh,
without dislodging, or giving me the trouble of parting from
my sweet tenant, we play'd over again the same opera, with 
the same delightful harmony and concert: our ardours, like
our love, knew no remission; and, all as the tide serv'd my
lover, lavish of his stores, and pleasure milked, over-flowed
me once more from the fulness of his oval reservoirs of the
genial emulsion: whilst, on my side, a convulsive grasp, in
the instant of my giving down the liquid contribution, ren-
der'd me sweetly subservient at once to the increase of his
joy, and of its effusions: moving me so, as to make me exert
all those springs of the compressive exsuction with which the
sensitive mechanism of that part thirstily draws and drains
the nipple of Love; with much such an instinctive eagerness
and attachment as, to compare great with less, kind nature
engages infants at the breast by the pleasure they find in
the motion of their little mouths and cheeks, to extract the
     But still there was no end of his vigour: this double
discharge had so far from extinguish'd his desires, for that
time, that it had not even calm'd them; and at his age, de-
sires are power.  He was proceeding then amazingly to push it
to a third triumph, still without uncasing, if a tenderness,
natural to true love, had not inspir'd me with self-denial
enough to spare, and not overstrain him: and accordingly,
entreating him to give himself and me quarter, I obtain'd,
at length, a short suspension of arms, but not before he had 
exultingly satisfy'd me that he gave out standing.
     The remainder of the night, with what we borrow'd upon
the day, we employ'd with unweary'd fervour in celebrating
thus the festival of our re-meeting; and got up pretty late
in the morning, gay, brisk and alert, though rest had been a
stranger to us: but the pleasures of love had been to us,
what the joy of victory is to an army; repose, refreshment,
     The journey into the country being now entirely out of
the question, and orders having been given over-night for
turning the horses' heads towards London, we left the inn as
soon as we had breakfasted, not without a liberal distribu-
tion of the tokens of my grateful sense of the happiness I 
     Charles and I were in my coach; the captain and my com-
panion in a chaise hir'd purposely for them, to leave us the
     Here, on the road, as the tumult of my senses was toler-
ably compos'd, I had command enough to head to break properly
to him the course of life that the consequence of my separa-
tion from him had driven me into: which, at the same time
that he tenderly deplor'd with me, he was the less shocked
at; as, on reflecting how he had left me circumstanc'd, he
     But when I opened the state of my fortune to him, and
with that sincerity which, from me to him, was so much a
nature in me, I begg'd of him his acceptance of it, on his
own terms.  I should appear to you perhaps too partial to my
passion, were I to attempt the doing his delicacy justice.
I shall content myself then with assuring you, that after
his flatly refusing the unreserv'd, unconditional donation
that I long persecuted him in vain to accept, it was at
length, in obedience to his serious commands (for I stood
out unaffectedly, till he exerted the sovereign authority
which love had given him over me), that I yielded my consent
to waive the remonstrance I did not fail of making strongly
to him, against his degrading himself, and incurring the 
reflection, however unjust, of having, for respects of for-
tune, barter'd his honour for infamy and prostitution, in
making one his wife, who thought herself too much honour'd
     The plea of love then over-ruling all objections,
Charles, entirely won with the merit of my sentiments for
him, which he could not but read the sincerity of in a heart
ever open to him, oblig'd me to receive his hand, by which
means I was in pass, among other innumerable blessings, to
bestow a legal parentage on those fine children you have
     Thus at length, I got snug into port, where, in the
bosom of virtue, I gather'd the only uncorrupt sweets: where,
looking back on the course of vice I had run, and comparing
its infamous blandishments with the infinitely superior joys
of innocence, I could not help pitying, even in point of
taste, those who, immers'd in gross sensuality, are insen-
sible to the so delicate charms of VIRTUE, than which even
PLEASURE has not a greater friend, nor than VICE a greater
enemy.  Thus temperance makes men lords over those pleasures 
that intemperance enslaves them to: the one, parent of
health, vigour, fertility, cheerfulness, and every other
desirable good of life; the other, of diseases, debility,
barrenness, self-loathing, with only every evil incident to
     You laugh, perhaps, at this tail-piece of morality, ex-
tracted from me by the force of truth, resulting from com-
par'd experiences: you think it, no doubt, out of place, out
of character; possibly too you may look on it as the paltry
finesse of one who seeks to mask a devotee to Vice under a
rag of a veil, impudently smuggled from the shrine of Virtue:
just as if one was to fancy one's self compleatly disguised
at a masquerade, with no other change of dress than turning
one's shoes into slippers; or, as if a writer should think to
shield a treasonable libel, by concluding it with a formal
prayer for the King.  But, independent of my flattering my-
self that you have a juster opinion of my sense and sincerity,
give me leave to represent to you, that such a supposition is
even more injurious to Virtue than to me: since, consistently
with candour and good-nature, it can have no foundation but
in the falsest of fears, that its pleasures cannot stand in
comparison with those of Vice; but let truth dare to hold it
up in its most alluring light: then mark, how spurious, how
low of taste, how comparatively inferior its joys are to those
which Virtue gives sanction to, and whose sentiments are not
above making even a sauce for the senses, but a sauce of the
highest relish; whilst Vices are the harpies that infect and
foul the feast.  The paths of Vice are sometimes strew'd with
roses, but then they are for ever infamous for many a thorn,
for many a canker-worm: those of Virtue are strew'd with roses
     If you do me then justice, you will esteem me perfectly
consistent in the incense I burn to Virtue.  If I have painted 
Vice in all its gayest colours, if I have deck'd it with flow-
ers, it has been solely in order to make the worthier, the 
     You know Mr. C*** O***, you know his estate, his worth,
and good sense: can you, will you pronounce it ill meant, at
least of him, when anxious for his son's morals, with a view
to form him to virtue, and inspire him with a fix'd, a
rational contempt for vice, he condescended to be his master
of the ceremonies, and led him by the hand thro' the most 
noted bawdy-houses in town, where he took care he should be
familiarized with all those scenes of debauchery, so fit to
nauseate a good taste?  The experiment, you will cry, is
dangerous.  True, on a fool: but are fools worth so much 
     I shall see you soon, and in the mean time think
In reprinting this story for a new edition I am reminded
that it was in the chapters of "Far from the Madding Crowd"
as they appeared month by month in a popular magazine, that
I first ventured to adopt the word "Wessex" from the pages
of early English history, and give it a fictitious
significance as the existing name of the district once
included in that extinct kingdom.  The series of novels I
projected being mainly of the kind called local, they seemed
to require a territorial definition of some sort to lend
unity to their scene.  Finding that the area of a single
country did not afford a canvas large enough for this
purpose, and that there were objections to an invented name,
I disinterred the old one.  The press and the public were
kind enough to welcome the fanciful plan, and willingly
joined me in the anachronism of imagining a Wessex
population living under Queen Victoria; -- a modern Wessex
of railways, the penny post, mowing and reaping machines,
union workhouses, lucifer matches, labourers who could read
and write, and National school children.  But I believe I am
correct in stating that, until the existence of this
contemporaneous Wessex was announced in the present story,
expression, "a Wessex peasant" or "a Wessex custom" would
theretofore have been taken to refer to nothing later in
I did not anticipate that this application of the word to a
modern use would extend outside the chapters of my own
chronicles.  But the name was soon taken up elsewhere as a
local designation.  The first to do so was the now defunct
Examiner, which, in the impression bearing date July 15,
1876, entitled one of its articles "The Wessex Labourer,"
the article turning out to be no dissertation on farming
during the Heptarchy, but on the modern peasant of the
south-west counties, and his presentation in these stories.
Since then the appellation which I had thought to reserve to
the horizons and landscapes of a merely realistic dream-
country, has become more and more popular as a practical
definition; and the dream-country has, by degrees,
solidified into a utilitarian region which people can go to,
take a house in, and write to the papers from.  But I ask
all good and gentle readers to be so kind as to forget this,
and to refuse steadfastly to believe that there are any
inhabitants of a Victorian Wessex outside the pages of this
and the companion volumes in which they were first
Moreover, the village called Weatherbury, wherein the scenes
of the present story of the series are for the most part
laid, would perhaps be hardly discernible by the explorer,
without help, in any existing place nowadays; though at the
time, comparatively recent, at which the tale was written, a
sufficient reality to meet the descriptions, both of
backgrounds and personages, might have been traced easily
enough.  The church remains, by great good fortune,
unrestored and intact, and a few of the old houses; but the
ancient malt-house, which was formerly so characteristic of
the parish, has been pulled down these twenty years; also
most of the thatched and dormered cottages that were once
lifeholds.  The game of prisoner's base, which not so long
ago seemed to enjoy a perennial vitality in front of the
worn-out stocks, may, so far as I can say, be entirely
unknown to the rising generation of schoolboys there.  The
practice of divination by Bible and key, the regarding of
valentines as things of serious import, the shearing-supper,
and the harvest-home, have, too, nearly disappeared in the
wake of the old houses; and with them have gone, it is said,
much of that love of fuddling to which the village at one
time was notoriously prone.  The change at the root of this
has been the recent supplanting of the class of stationary
cottagers, who carried on the local traditions and humours,
by a population of more or less migratory labourers, which
has led to a break of continuity in local history, more
fatal than any other thing to the preservation of legend,
folk-lore, close inter-social relations, and eccentric
individualities.  For these the indispensable conditions of
existence are attachment to the soil of one particular spot
WHEN Farmer Oak smiled, the corners of his mouth spread till
they were within an unimportant distance of his ears, his
eyes were reduced to chinks, and diverging wrinkles appeared
round them, extending upon his countenance like the rays in
His Christian name was Gabriel, and on working days he was a
young man of sound judgment, easy motions, proper dress, and
general good character.  On Sundays he was a man of misty
views, rather given to postponing, and hampered by his best
clothes and umbrella:  upon the whole, one who felt himself
to occupy morally that vast middle space of Laodicean
neutrality which lay between the Communion people of the
parish and the drunken section, -- that is, he went to
church, but yawned privately by the time the con-gegation
reached the Nicene creed, and thought of what there would be
for dinner when he meant to be listening to the sermon.
Or, to state his character as it stood in the scale of public
opinion, when his friends and critics were in tantrums, he
was considered rather a bad man; when they were pleased, he
was rather a good man; when they were neither, he was a man
whose moral colour was a kind of pepper-and-salt mixture.
Since he lived six times as many working-days as Sundays,
Oak's appearance in his old clothes was most peculiarly his
own -- the mental picture formed by his neighbours in
imagining him being always dressed in that way.  He wore a
low-crowned felt hat, spread out at the base by tight
jamming upon the head for security in high winds, and a coat
like Dr. Johnson's; his lower extremities being encased in
ordinary leather leggings and boots emphatically large,
affording to each foot a roomy apartment so constructed that
any wearer might stand in a river all day long and know
nothing of damp -- their maker being a conscientious man who
endeavoured to compensate for any weakness in his cut by
Mr. Oak carried about him, by way of watch, what may be
called a small silver clock; in other words, it was a watch
as to shape and intention, and a small clock as to size.
This instrument being several years older than Oak's
grandfather, had the peculiarity of going either too fast or
not at all.  The smaller of its hands, too, occasionally
slipped round on the pivot, and thus, though the minutes
were told with precision, nobody could be quite certain of
the hour they belonged to.  The stopping peculiarity of his
watch Oak remedied by thumps and shakes, and he escaped any
evil consequences from the other two defects by constant
comparisons with and observations of the sun and stars, and
by pressing his face close to the glass of his neighbours'
windows, till he could discern the hour marked by the green-
faced timekeepers within.  It may be mentioned that Oak's
fob being difficult of access, by reason of its somewhat
high situation in the waistband of his trousers (which also
lay at a remote height under his waistcoat), the watch was
as a necessity pulled out by throwing the body to one side,
compressing the mouth and face to a mere mass of ruddy flesh
on account of the exertion required, and drawing up the
But some thoughtful persons, who had seen him walking across
one of his fields on a certain December morning -- sunny and
exceedingly mild -- might have regarded Gabriel Oak in other
aspects than these.  In his face one might notice that many
of the hues and curves of youth had tarried on to manhood:
there even remained in his remoter crannies some relics of
the boy.  His height and breadth would have been sufficient
to make his presence imposing, had they been exhibited with
due consideration.  But there is a way some men have, rural
and urban alike, for which the mind is more responsible than
flesh and sinew:  it is a way of curtailing their dimensions
by their manner of showing them.  And from a quiet modesty
that would have become a vestal which seemed continually to
impress upon him that he had no great claim on the world's
room, Oak walked unassumingly and with a faintly perceptible
bend, yet distinct from a bowing of the shoulders.  This may
be said to be a defect in an individual if he depends for
his valuation more upon his appearance than upon his
He had just reached the time of life at which "young" is
ceasing to be the prefix of "man" in speaking of one.
He was at the brightest period of masculine growth, for his
intellect and his emotions were clearly separated: he had
passed the time during which the influence of youth
indiscriminately mingles them in the character of impulse,
and he had not yet arrived at the stage wherein they become
united again, in the character of prejudice, by the
The field he was in this morning sloped to a ridge called
Norcombe Hill.  Through a spur of this hill ran the highway
between Emminster and Chalk-Newton.  Casually glancing over
the hedge, Oak saw coming down the incline before him an
ornamental spring waggon, painted yellow and gaily marked,
drawn by two horses, a waggoner walking alongside bearing a
whip perpendicularly.  The waggon was laden with household
goods and window plants, and on the apex of the whole sat a
woman, young and attractive.  Gabriel had not beheld the
sight for more than half a minute, when the vehicle was
"The tailboard of the waggon is gone, Miss," said the
"Then I heard it fall," said the girl, in a soft, though not
particularly low voice.  "I heard a noise I could not
The sensible horses stood -- perfectly still, and the
waggoner's steps sank fainter and fainter in the distance.
The girl on the summit of the load sat motionless,
surrounded by tables and chairs with their legs upwards,
backed by an oak settle, and ornamented in front by pots of
geraniums, myrtles, and cactuses, together with a caged
canary -- all probably from the windows of the house just
vacated.  There was also a cat in a willow basket, from the
partly-opened lid of which she gazed with half-closed eyes,
and affectionately-surveyed the small birds around.
The handsome girl waited for some time idly in her place,
and the only sound heard in the stillness was the hopping of
the canary up and down the perches of its prison.  Then she
looked attentively downwards.  It was not at the bird, nor
at the cat; it was at an oblong package tied in paper, and
lying between them.  She turned her head to learn if the
waggoner were coming.  He was not yet in sight; and her eyes
crept back to the package, her thoughts seeming to run upon
what was inside it.  At length she drew the article into her
lap, and untied the paper covering; a small swing looking-
glass was disclosed, in which she proceeded to survey
herself attentively.  She parted her lips and smiled.
It was a fine morning, and the sun lighted up to a scarlet
glow the crimson jacket she wore, and painted a soft lustre
upon her bright face and dark hair.  The myrtles, geraniums,
and cactuses packed around her were fresh and green, and at
such a leafless season they invested the whole concern of
horses, waggon, furniture, and girl with a peculiar vernal
charm.  What possessed her to indulge in such a performance
in the sight of the sparrows, blackbirds, and unperceived
farmer who were alone its spectators, -- whether the smile
began as a factitious one, to test her capacity in that art,
-- nobody knows; it ended certainly in a real smile.  She
blushed at herself, and seeing her reflection blush, blushed
The change from the customary spot and necessary occasion of
such an act -- from the dressing hour in a bedroom to a time
of travelling out of doors -- lent to the idle deed a
novelty it did not intrinsically possess.  The picture was a
delicate one.  Woman's prescriptive infirmity had stalked
into the sunlight, which had clothed it in the freshness of
an originality.  A cynical inference was irresistible by
Gabriel Oak as he regarded the scene, generous though he
fain would have been.  There was no necessity whatever for
her looking in the glass.  She did not adjust her hat, or
pat her hair, or press a dimple into shape, or do one thing
to signify that any such intention had been her motive in
taking up the glass.  She simply observed herself as a fair
product of Nature in the feminine kind, her thoughts seeming
to glide into far-off though likely dramas in which men
would play a part -- vistas of probable triumphs -- the
smiles being of a phase suggesting that hearts were imagined
as lost and won.  Still, this was but conjecture, and the
whole series of actions was so idly put forth as to make it
rash to assert that intention had any part in them at all.
The waggoner's steps were heard returning.  She put the
glass in the paper, and the whole again into its place.
When the waggon had passed on, Gabriel withdrew from his
point of espial, and descending into the road, followed the
vehicle to the turnpike-gate some way beyond the bottom of
the hill, where the object of his contemplation now halted
for the payment of toll.  About twenty steps still remained
between him and the gate, when he heard a dispute.  It was a
difference concerning twopence between the persons with the
"Mis'ess's niece is upon the top of the things, and she says
that's enough that I've offered ye, you great miser, and she
won't pay any more."  These were the waggoner's words.
"Very well; then mis'ess's niece can't pass," said the
Oak looked from one to the other of the disputants, and fell
into a reverie.  There was something in the tone of twopence
remarkably insignificant.  Threepence had a definite value
as money -- it was an appreciable infringement on a day's
wages, and, as such, a higgling matter; but twopence --
"Here," he said, stepping forward and handing twopence to
the gatekeeper; "let the young woman pass."  He looked up at
Gabriel's features adhered throughout their form so exactly
to the middle line between the beauty of St. John and the
ugliness of Judas Iscariot, as represented in a window of
the church he attended, that not a single lineament could be
selected and called worthy either of distinction or
notoriety.  The red-jacketed and dark-haired maiden seemed
to think so too, for she carelessly glanced over him, and
told her man to drive on.  She might have looked her thanks
to Gabriel on a minute scale, but she did not speak them;
more probably she felt none, for in gaining her a passage he
had lost her her point, and we know how women take a favour
The gatekeeper surveyed the retreating vehicle.  "That's a
"And the greatest of them is -- well, what it is always."
Gabriel, perhaps a little piqued by the comely traveller's
indifference, glanced back to where he had witnessed her
NIGHT -- THE FLOCK -- AN INTERIOR -- ANOTHER INTERIOR
IT was nearly midnight on the eve of St. Thomas's, the
shortest day in the year.  A desolating wind wandered from
the north over the hill whereon Oak had watched the yellow
waggon and its occupant in the sunshine of a few days
Norcombe Hill -- not far from lonely Toller-Down -- was one
of the spots which suggest to a passer-by that he is in the
presence of a shape approaching the indestructible as nearly
as any to be found on earth.  It was a featureless convexity
of chalk and soil -- an ordinary specimen of those smoothly-
outlined protuberances of the globe which may remain
undisturbed on some great day of confusion, when far grander
The hill was covered on its northern side by an ancient and
decaying plantation of beeches, whose upper verge formed a
line over the crest, fringing its arched curve against the
sky, like a mane.  To-night these trees sheltered the
southern slope from the keenest blasts, which smote the wood
and floundered through it with a sound as of grumbling, or
gushed over its crowning boughs in a weakened moan.  The dry
leaves in the ditch simmered and boiled in the same breezes,
a tongue of air occasionally ferreting out a few, and
sending them spinning across the grass.  A group or two of
the latest in date amongst the dead multitude had remained
till this very mid-winter time on the twigs which bore them
and in falling rattled against the trunks with smart taps.
Between this half-wooded half naked hill, and the vague
still horizon that its summit indistinctly commanded, was a
mysterious sheet of fathomless shade -- the sounds from
which suggested that what it concealed bore some reduced
resemblance to features here.  The thin grasses, more or
less coating the hill, were touched by the wind in breezes
of differing powers, and almost of differing natures -- one
rubbing the blades heavily, another raking them piercingly,
another brushing them like a soft broom.  The instinctive
act of humankind was to stand and listen, and learn how the
trees on the right and the trees on the left wailed or
chaunted to each other in the regular antiphonies of a
cathedral choir; how hedges and other shapes to leeward then
caught the note, lowering it to the tenderest sob; and how
the hurrying gust then plunged into the south, to be heard
The sky was clear -- remarkably clear -- and the twinkling
of all the stars seemed to be but throbs of one body, timed
by a common pulse.  The North Star was directly in the
wind's eye, and since evening the Bear had swung round it
outwardly to the east, till he was now at a right angle with
the meridian.  A difference of colour in the stars --
oftener read of than seen in England -- was really
perceptible here.  The sovereign brilliancy of Sirius
pierced the eye with a steely glitter, the star called
Capella was yellow, Aldebaran and Betelgueux shone with a
To persons standing alone on a hill during a clear midnight
such as this, the roll of the world eastward is almost a
palpable movement.  The sensation may be caused by the
panoramic glide of the stars past earthly objects, which is
perceptible in a few minutes of stillness, or by the better
outlook upon space that a hill affords, or by the wind, or
by the solitude; but whatever be its origin, the impression
of riding along is vivid and abiding.  The poetry of motion
is a phrase much in use, and to enjoy the epic form of that
gratification it is necessary to stand on a hill at a small
hour of the night, and, having first expanded with a sense
of difference from the mass of civilised mankind, who are
dreamwrapt and disregardful of all such proceedings at this
time, long and quietly watch your stately progress through
the stars.  After such a nocturnal reconnoitre it is hard to
get back to earth, and to believe that the consciousness of
such majestic speeding is derived from a tiny human frame.
Suddenly an unexpected series of sounds began to be heard in
this place up against the sky.  They had a clearness which
was to be found nowhere in the wind, and a sequence which
was to be found nowhere in nature.  They were the notes of
The tune was not floating unhindered into the open air:  it
seemed muffled in some way, and was altogether too curtailed
in power to spread high or wide.  It came from the direction
of a small dark object under the plantation hedge -- a
shepherd's hut -- now presenting an outline to which an
uninitiated person might have been puzzled to attach either
The image as a whole was that of a small Noah's Ark on a
small Ararat, allowing the traditionary outlines and general
form of the Ark which are followed by toy-makers -- and by
these means are established in men's imaginations among
their firmest, because earliest impressions --  to pass as
an approximate pattern.  The hut stood on little wheels,
which raised its floor about a foot from the ground.  Such
shepherds' huts are dragged into the fields when the lambing
season comes on, to shelter the shepherd in his enforced
It was only latterly that people had begun to call Gabriel
"Farmer" Oak.  During the twelvemonth preceding this time he
had been enabled by sustained efforts of industry and
chronic good spirits to lease the small sheep-farm of which
Norcombe Hill was a portion, and stock it with two hundred
sheep.  Previously he had been a bailiff for a short time,
and earlier still a shepherd only, having from his childhood
assisted his father in tending the flocks of large
This venture, unaided and alone, into the paths of farming
as master and not as man, with an advance of sheep not yet
paid for, was a critical juncture with Gabriel Oak, and he
recognised his position clearly.  The first movement in his
new progress was the lambing of his ewes, and sheep having
been his speciality from his youth, he wisely refrained from
deputing the task of tending them at this season to a
The wind continued to beat about the corners of the hut, but
the flute-playing ceased.  A rectangular space of light
appeared in the side of the hut, and in the opening the
outline of Farmer Oak's figure.  He carried a lantern in his
hand, and closing the door behind him, came forward and
busied himself about this nook of the field for nearly
twenty minutes, the lantern light appearing and disappearing
here and there, and brightening him or darkening him as he
Oak's motions, though they had a quiet-energy, were slow,
and their deliberateness accorded well with his occupation.
Fitness being the basis of beauty, nobody could have denied
that his steady swings and turns in and about the flock had
elements of grace, Yet, although if occasion demanded he
could do or think a thing with as mercurial a dash as can
the men of towns who are more to the manner born, his
special power, morally, physically, and mentally, was
static, owing little or nothing to momentum as a rule.
A close examination of the ground hereabout, even by the wan
starlight only, revealed how a portion of what would have
been casually called a wild slope had been appropriated by
Farmer Oak for his great purpose this winter.  Detached
hurdles thatched with straw were stuck into the ground at
various scattered points, amid and under which the whitish
forms of his meek ewes moved and rustled.  The ring of the
sheep-bell, which had been silent during his absence,
recommenced, in tones that had more mellowness than
clearness, owing to an increasing growth of surrounding
wool.  This continued till Oak withdrew again from the
flock.  He returned to the hut, bringing in his arms a new-
born lamb, consisting of four legs large enough for a full-
grown sheep, united by a seemingly inconsiderable membrane
about half the substance of the legs collectively, which
constituted the animal's entire body just at present.
The little speck of life he placed on a wisp of hay before
the small stove, where a can of milk was simmering.  Oak
extinguished the lantern by blowing into it and then
pinching the snuff, the cot being lighted by a candle
suspended by a twisted wire.  A rather hard couch, formed of
a few corn sacks thrown carelessly down, covered half the
floor of this little habitation, and here the young man
stretched himself along, loosened his woollen cravat, and
closed his eyes.  In about the time a person unaccustomed to
bodily labour would have decided upon which side to lie,
The inside of the hut, as it now presented itself, was cosy
and alluring, and the scarlet handful of fire in addition to
the candle, reflecting its own genial colour upon whatever
it could reach, flung associations of enjoyment even over
utensils and tools.  In the corner stood the sheep-crook,
and along a shelf at one side were ranged bottles and
canisters of the simple preparations pertaining to ovine
surgery and physic; spirits of wine, turpentine, tar,
magnesia, ginger, and castor-oil being the chief.  On a
triangular shelf across the corner stood bread, bacon,
cheese, and a cup for ale or cider, which was supplied from
a flagon beneath.  Beside the provisions lay the flute,
whose notes had lately been called forth by the lonely
watcher to beguile a tedious hour.  The house was ventilated
by two round holes, like the lights of a ship's cabin, with
The lamb, revived by the warmth began to bleat, and the
sound entered Gabriel's ears and brain with an instant
meaning, as expected sounds will.  Passing from the
profoundest sleep to the most alert wakefulness with the
same ease that had accompanied the reverse operation, he
looked at his watch, found that the hour-hand had shifted
again, put on his hat, took the lamb in his arms, and
carried it into the darkness.  After placing the little
creature with its mother, he stood and carefully examined
the sky, to ascertain the time of night from the altitudes
The Dog-star and Aldebaran, pointing to the restless
Pleiades, were half-way up the Southern sky, and between
them hung Orion, which gorgeous constellation never burnt
more vividly than now, as it soared forth above the rim of
the landscape.  Castor and Pollux with their quiet shine
were almost on the meridian: the barren and gloomy Square of
Pegasus was creeping round to the north-west; far away
through the plantation Vega sparkled like a lamp suspended
amid the leafless trees, and Cassiopeia's chair stood
Being a man not without a frequent consciousness that there
was some charm in this life he led, he stood still after
looking at the sky as a useful instrument, and regarded it
in an appreciative spirit, as a work of art superlatively
beautiful.  For a moment he seemed impressed with the
speaking loneliness of the scene, or rather with the
complete abstraction from all its compass of the sights and
sounds of man.  Human shapes, interferences, troubles, and
joys were all as if they were not, and there seemed to be on
the shaded hemisphere of the globe no sentient being save
himself; he could fancy them all gone round to the sunny
Occupied thus, with eyes stretched afar, Oak gradually
perceived that what he had previously taken to be a star low
down behind the outskirts of the plantation was in reality
no such thing.  It was an artificial light, almost close at
To find themselves utterly alone at night where company is
desirable and expected makes some people fearful; but a case
more trying by far to the nerves is to discover some
mysterious companionship when intuition, sensation, memory,
analogy, testimony, probability, induction -- every kind of
evidence in the logician's list -- have united to persuade
Farmer Oak went towards the plantation and pushed through
its lower boughs to the windy side.  A dim mass under the
slope reminded him that a shed occupied a place here, the
site being a cutting into the slope of the hill, so that at
its back part the roof was almost level with the ground.  In
front it was formed of board nailed to posts and covered
with tar as a preservative.  Through crevices in the roof
and side spread streaks and dots of light, a combination of
which made the radiance that had attracted him.  Oak stepped
up behind, where,leaning down upon the roof and putting his
eye close to a hole, he could see into the interior clearly.
The place contained two women and two cows.  By the side of
the latter a steaming bran-mash stood in a bucket.  One of
the women was past middle age.  Her companion was apparently
young and graceful; he could form no decided opinion upon
her looks, her position being almost beneath his eye, so
that he saw her in a bird's-eye view, as Milton's Satan
first saw Paradise.  She wore no bonnet or hat, but had
enveloped herself in a large cloak, which was carelessly
"There, now we'll go home," said the elder of the two,
resting her knuckles upon her hips, and looking at their
goings-on as a whole.  "I do hope Daisy will fetch round
again now.  I have never been more frightened in my life,
but I don't mind breaking my rest if she recovers."
The young woman, whose eyelids were apparently inclined to
fall together on the smallest provocation of silence, yawned
without parting her lips to any inconvenient extent,
whereupon Gabriel caught the infection and slightly yawned
"I wish we were rich enough to pay a man to do these
"As we are not, we must do them ourselves," said the other;
"Well, my hat is gone, however," continued the younger.
"It went over the hedge, I think.  The idea of such a slight
The cow standing erect was of the Devon breed, and was
encased in a tight warm hide of rich Indian red, as
absolutely uniform from eyes to tail as if the animal had
been dipped in a dye of that colour, her long back being
mathematically level.  The other was spotted, grey and
white.  Beside her Oak now noticed a little calf about a day
old, looking idiotically at the two women, which showed that
it had not long been accustomed to the phenomenon of
eyesight, and often turning to the lantern, which it
apparently mistook for the moon, inherited instinct having
as yet had little time for correction by experience.
Between the sheep and the cows Lucina had been busy on
"I think we had better send for some oatmeal," said the
"Yes, aunt; and I'll ride over for it as soon as it is
Oak, upon hearing these remarks, became more curious to
observe her features, but this prospect being denied him by
the hooding effect of the cloak, and by his aerial position,
he felt himself drawing upon his fancy for their details.
In making even horizontal and clear inspections we colour
and mould according to the wants within us whatever our eyes
bring in.  Had Gabriel been able from the first to get a
distinct view of her countenance, his estimate of it as very
handsome or slightly so would have been as his soul required
a divinity at the moment or was ready supplied with one.
Having for some time known the want of a satisfactory form
to fill an increasing void within him, his position moreover
affording the widest scope for his fancy, he painted her a
By one of those whimsical coincidences in which Nature, like
a busy mother, seems to spare a moment from her unremitting
labours to turn and make her children smile, the girl now
dropped the cloak, and forth tumbled ropes of black hair
over a red jacket.  Oak knew her instantly as the heroine of
the yellow waggon, myrtles, and looking-glass:  prosily, as
They placed the calf beside its mother again, took up the
lantern, and went out, the light sinking down the hill till
it was no more than a nebula.  Gabriel Oak returned to his
THE sluggish day began to break.  Even its position
terrestrially is one of the elements of a new interest, and
for no particular reason save that the incident of the night
had occurred there Oak went again into the plantation.
Lingering and musing here, he heard the steps of a horse at
the foot of the hill, and soon there appeared in view an
auburn pony with a girl on its back, ascending by the path
leading past the cattle-shed.  She was the young woman of
the night before.  Gabriel instantly thought of the hat she
had mentioned as having lost in the wind; possibly she had
come to look for it.  He hastily scanned the ditch and after
walking about ten yards along it found the hat among the
leaves.  Gabriel took it in his hand and returned to his
hut.  Here he ensconced himself, and peeped through the
loophole in the direction of the rider's approach.
She came up and looked around -- then on the other side of
the hedge.  Gabriel was about to advance and restore the
missing article when an unexpected performance induced him
to suspend the action for the present.  The path, after
passing the cowshed, bisected the plantation.  It was not a
bridle-path -- merely a pedestrian's track, and the boughs
spread horizontally at a height not greater than seven feet
above the ground, which made it impossible to ride erect
beneath them.  The girl, who wore no riding-habit, looked
around for a moment, as if to assure herself that all
humanity was out of view, then dexterously dropped backwards
flat upon the pony's back, her head over its tail, her feet
against its shoulders, and her eyes to the sky.  The
rapidity of her glide into this position was that of a
kingfisher -- its noiselessness that of a hawk.  Gabriel's
eyes had scarcely been able to follow her.  The tall lank
unconcerned.  Thus she passed under the level boughs.
The performer seemed quite at home anywhere between a
horse's head and its tail, and the necessity for this
abnormal attitude having ceased with the passage of the
plantation, she began to adopt another, even more obviously
convenient than the first.  She had no side-saddle, and it
was very apparent that a firm seat upon the smooth leather
beneath her was unattainable sideways.  Springing to her
accustomed perpendicular like a bowed sapling, and
satisfying herself that nobody was in sight, she seated
herself in the manner demanded by the saddle, though hardly
expected of the woman, and trotted off in the direction of
Oak was amused, perhaps a little astonished, and hanging up
the hat in his hut, went again among his ewes.  An hour
passed, the girl returned, properly seated now, with a bag
of bran in front of her.  On nearing the cattle-shed she was
met by a boy bringing a milking-pail, who held the reins of
the pony whilst she slid off.  The boy led away the horse,
Soon soft spirts alternating with loud spirts came in
regular succession from within the shed, the obvious sounds
of a person milking a cow.  Gabriel took the lost hat in his
hand, and waited beside the path she would follow in leaving
She came, the pail in one hand, hanging against her knee.
The left arm was extended as a balance, enough of it being
shown bare to make Oak wish that the event had happened in
the summer, when the whole would have been revealed.  There
was a bright air and manner about her now, by which she
seemed to imply that the desirability of her existence could
not be questioned; and this rather saucy assumption failed
in being offensive because a beholder felt it to be, upon
the whole, true.  Like exceptional emphasis in the tone of a
genius, that which would have made mediocrity ridiculous was
an addition to recognised power.  It was with some surprise
that she saw Gabriel's face rising like the moon behind the
The adjustment of the farmer's hazy conceptions of her
charms to the portrait of herself she now presented him with
was less a diminution than a difference.  The starting-point
selected by the judgment was her height. She seemed tall,
but the pail was a small one, and the hedge diminutive;
hence, making allowance for error by comparison with these,
she could have been not above the height to be chosen by
women as best.  All features of consequence were severe and
regular.  It may have been observed by persons who go about
the shires with eyes for beauty, that in Englishwoman a
classically-formed face is seldom found to be united with a
figure of the same pattern, the highly-finished features
being generally too large for the remainder of the frame;
that a graceful and proportionate figure of eight heads
usually goes off into random facial curves.  Without
throwing a Nymphean tissue over a milkmaid, let it be said
that here criticism checked itself as out of place, and
looked at her proportions with a long consciousness of
pleasure.  From the contours of her figure in its upper
part, she must have had a beautiful neck and shoulders; but
since her infancy nobody had ever seen them.  Had she been
put into a low dress she would have run and thrust her head
into a bush.  Yet she was not a shy girl by any means; it
was merely her instinct to draw the line dividing the seen
That the girl's thoughts hovered about her face and form as
soon as she caught Oak's eyes conning the same page was
natural, and almost certain.  The self-consciousness shown
would have been vanity if a little more pronounced, dignity
if a little less.  Rays of male vision seem to have a
tickling effect upon virgin faces in rural districts; she
brushed hers with her hand, as if Gabriel had been
irritating its pink surface by actual touch, and the free
air of her previous movements was reduced at the same time
to a chastened phase of itself.  Yet it was the man who
"It is mine," said she, and, from a sense of proportion,
kept down to a small smile an inclination to laugh
"Well -- it was."  She was surprised.  "How did you know?"
"That or thereabouts.  I'm lately come to this place."
"A large farm?" she inquired, casting her eyes round, and
swinging back her hair, which was black in the shaded
hollows of its mass; but it being now an hour past sunrise the
rays touched its prominent curves with a colour of their own.
"No; not large.  About a hundred."  (In speaking of farms
the word "acres" is omitted by the natives, by analogy to
"I wanted my hat this morning." she went on.  "I had to ride
"Where?" she inquired, a misgiving bringing every muscle of
"Here -- going through the plantation, and all down the
hill," said Farmer Oak, with an aspect excessively knowing
with regard to some matter in his mind, as he gazed at a
remote point in the direction named, and then turned back to
A perception caused him to withdraw his own eyes from hers
Recollection of the strange antics she had indulged in when
passing through the trees was succeeded in the girl by a
nettled palpitation, and that by a hot face.  It was a time
to see a woman redden who was not given to reddening as a
rule; not a point in the milkmaid but was of the deepest
rose-colour.  From the Maiden's Blush, through all varieties
of the Provence down to the Crimson Tuscany, the countenance
of Oak's acquaintance quickly graduated; whereupon he, in
The sympathetic man still looked the other way, and wondered
when she would recover coolness sufficient to justify him in
facing her again.  He heard what seemed to be the flitting
of a dead leaf upon the breeze, and looked.  She had gone
With an air between that of Tragedy and Comedy Gabriel
Five mornings and evenings passed.  The young woman came
regularly to milk the healthy cow or to attend to the sick
one, but never allowed her vision to stray in the direction
of Oak's person.  His want of tact had deeply offended her --
not by seeing what he could not help, but by letting her
know that he had seen it.  For, as without law there is no
sin, without eyes there is no indecorum; and she appeared to
feel that Gabriel's espial had made her an indecorous woman
without her own connivance.  It was food for great regret
with him; it was also a CONTRETEMPS which touched into life
a latent heat he had experienced in that direction.
The acquaintanceship might, however, have ended in a slow
forgetting, but for an incident which occurred at the end of
the same week.  One afternoon it began to freeze, and the
frost increased with evening, which drew on like a stealthy
tightening of bonds.  It was a time when in cottages the
breath of the sleepers freezes to the sheets; when round the
drawing-room fire of a thick-walled mansion the sitters'
backs are cold, even whilst their faces are all aglow.  Many
a small bird went to bed supperless that night among the
As the milking-hour drew near, Oak kept his usual watch upon
the cowshed.  At last he felt cold, and shaking an extra
quantity of bedding round the yearling ewes he entered the
hut and heaped more fuel upon the stove.  The wind came in
at the bottom of the door, and to prevent it Oak laid a sack
there and wheeled the cot round a little more to the south.
Then the wind spouted in at a ventilating hole -- of which
Gabriel had always known that when the fire was lighted and
the door closed one of these must be kept open -- that
chosen being always on the side away from the wind.  Closing
the slide to windward, he turned to open the other; on
second thoughts the farmer considered that he would first
sit down leaving both closed for a minute or two, till the
temperature of the hut was a little raised.  He sat down.
His head began to ache in an unwonted manner, and, fancying
himself weary by reason of the broken rests of the preceding
nights, Oak decided to get up, open the slide, and then
allow himself to fall asleep.  He fell asleep, however,
without having performed the necessary preliminary.
How long he remained unconscious Gabriel never knew.  During
the first stages of his return to perception peculiar deeds
seemed to be in course of enactment.  His dog was howling,
his head was aching fearfully -- somebody was pulling him
On opening his eyes he found that evening had sunk to dusk
in a strange manner of unexpectedness.  The young girl with
the remarkably pleasant lips and white teeth was beside him.
More than this -- astonishingly more -- his head was upon
her lap, his face and neck were disagreeably wet, and her
She seemed to experience mirth, but of too insignificant a
"Nothing now,' she answered, "since you are not dead. It is
a wonder you were not suffocated in this hut of yours."
"Ah, the hut!" murmured Gabriel.  "I gave ten pounds for
that hut.  But I'll sell it, and sit under thatched hurdles
as they did in old times, and curl up to sleep in a lock of
straw!  It played me nearly the same trick the other day!"
Gabriel, by way of emphasis, brought down his fist upon the
"It was not exactly the fault of the hut," she observed in a
tone which showed her to be that novelty among women -- one
who finished a thought before beginning the sentence which
was to convey it.  "You should, I think, have considered,
and not have been so foolish as to leave the slides closed."
"Yes I suppose I should," said Oak, absently.  He was
endeavouring to catch and appreciate the sensation of being
thus with her, his head upon her dress, before the event
passed on into the heap of bygone things.  He wished she
knew his impressions; but he would as soon have thought of
carrying an odour in a net as of attempting to convey the
intangibilities of his feeling in the coarse meshes of
She made him sit up, and then Oak began wiping his face and
shaking himself like a Samson.  "How can I thank 'ee?" he
said at last, gratefully, some of the natural rusty red
"Oh, never mind that," said the girl, smiling, and allowing
her smile to hold good for Gabriel's next remark, whatever
"I heard your dog howling and scratching at the door of the
hut when I came to the milking (it was so lucky, Daisy's
milking is almost over for the season, and I shall not come
here after this week or the next).  The dog saw me, and
jumped over to me, and laid hold of my skirt.  I came across
and looked round the hut the very first thing to see if the
slides were closed.  My uncle has a hut like this one, and I
have heard him tell his shepherd not to go to sleep without
leaving a slide open.  I opened the door, and there you were
like dead.  I threw the milk over you, as there was no
"I wonder if I should have died?" Gabriel said, in a low
voice, which was rather meant to travel back to himself than
"Oh no!" the girl replied.  She seemed to prefer a less
tragic probability; to have saved a man from death involved
talk that should harmonise with the dignity of such a deed --
"I believe you saved my life, Miss ---- I don't know your
"I would just as soon not tell it -- rather not.  There is
no reason either why I should, as you probably will never
"You can inquire at my aunt's -- she will tell you."
"And mine isn't.  You seem fond of yours in speaking it so
"You see, it is the only one I shall ever have, and I must
"I always think mine sounds odd and disagreeable."
"Mercy! -- how many opinions you keep about you concerning
"Well, Miss -- excuse the words -- I thought you would like
them. But I can't match you, I know, in napping out my mind
upon my tongue.  I never was very clever in my inside.  But
She hesitated, somewhat disconcerted at Oak's old-fashioned
earnest conclusion to a dialogue lightly carried on.  "Very
well," she said, and gave him her hand, compressing her lips
to a demure impassivity.  He held it but an instant, and in
his fear of being too demonstrative, swerved to the opposite
extreme, touching her fingers with the lightness of a small-
"You may have it again if you like; there it is."  She gave
Oak held it longer this time -- indeed, curiously long.
"How soft it is -- being winter time, too -- not chapped or
"There -- that's long enough," said she, though without
pulling it away. "But I suppose you are thinking you would
"I wasn't thinking of any such thing," said Gabriel, simply;
Gabriel felt himself guilty of another want of tact.
"Now find out my name," she said, teasingly; and withdrew.
THE only superiority in women that is tolerable to the rival
sex is, as a rule, that of the unconscious kind; but a
superiority which recognizes itself may sometimes please by
suggesting possibilities of capture to the subordinated man.
This well-favoured and comely girl soon made appreciable
inroads upon the emotional constitution of young Farmer Oak.
Love, being an extremely exacting usurer (a sense of
exorbitant profit, spiritually, by an exchange of hearts,
being at the bottom of pure passions, as that of exorbitant
profit, bodily or materially, is at the bottom of those of
lower atmosphere), every morning Oak's feelings were as
sensitive as the money-market in calculations upon his
chances.  His dog waited for his meals in a way so like that
in which Oak waited for the girl's presence, that the farmer
was quite struck with the resemblance, felt it lowering, and
would not look at the dog.  However, he continued to watch
through the hedge for her regular coming, and thus his
corresponding effect being produced upon herself.  Oak had
nothing finished and ready to say as yet, and not being able
to frame love phrases which end where they begin; passionate
By making inquiries he found that the girl's name was
Bathsheba Everdene, and that the cow would go dry in about
At last the eighth day came.  The cow had ceased to give
milk for that year, and Bathsheba Everdene came up the hill
no more.  Gabriel had reached a pitch of existence he never
could have anticipated a short time before.  He liked saying
"Bathsheba" as a private enjoyment instead of whistling;
turned over his taste to black hair, though he had sworn by
brown ever since he was a boy, isolated himself till the
space he filled in the public eye was contemptibly small.
Love is a possible strength in an actual weakness.  Marriage
transforms a distraction into a support, the power of which
should be, and happily often is, in direct proportion to the
degree of imbecility it supplants.  Oak began now to see
light in this direction, and said to himself, "I'll make her
my wife, or upon my soul I shall be good for nothing!"
All this while he was perplexing himself about an errand on
which he might consistently visit the cottage of Bathsheba's
He found his opportunity in the death of a ewe, mother of a
living lamb.  On a day which had a summer face and a winter
constitution -- a fine January morning, when there was just
enough blue sky visible to make cheerfully-disposed people
wish for more, and an occasional gleam of silvery sunshine,
Oak put the lamb into a respectable Sunday basket, and
stalked across the fields to the house of Mrs. Hurst, the
aunt -- George, the dog walking behind, with a countenance
of great concern at the serious turn pastoral affairs seemed
Gabriel had watched the blue wood-smoke curling from the
chimney with strange meditation.  At evening he had
fancifully traced it down the chimney to the spot of its
origin -- seen the hearth and Bathsheba beside it -- beside
it in her out-door dress; for the clothes she had worn on
the hill were by association equally with her person
included in the compass of his affection; they seemed at
this early time of his love a necessary ingredient of the
He had made a toilet of a nicely-adjusted kind -- of a
nature between the carefully neat and the carelessly ornate
-- of a degree between fine-market-day and wet-Sunday
selection.  He thoroughly cleaned his silver watch-chain
with whiting, put new lacing straps to his boots, looked to
the brass eyelet-holes, went to the inmost heart of the
plantation for a new walking-stick, and trimmed it
vigorously on his way back; took a new handkerchief from the
bottom of his clothes-box, put on the light waistcoat
patterned all over with sprigs of an elegant flower uniting
the beauties of both rose and lily without the defects of
either, and used all the hair-oil he possessed upon his
usually dry, sandy, and inextricably curly hair, till he had
deepened it to a splendidly novel colour, between that of
guano and Roman cement, making it stick to his head like
mace round a nutmeg, or wet seaweed round a boulder after
Nothing disturbed the stillness of the cottage save the
chatter of a knot of sparrows on the eaves; one might fancy
scandal and rumour to be no less the staple topic of these
little coteries on roofs than of those under them.  It
seemed that the omen was an unpropitious one, for, as the
rather untoward commencement of Oak's overtures, just as he
arrived by the garden gate, he saw a cat inside, going into
various arched shapes and fiendish convulsions at the sight
of his dog George.  The dog took no notice , for he had
arrived at an age at which all superfluous barking was
cynically avoided as a waste of breath -- in fact, he never
barked even at the sheep except to order, when it was done
with an absolutely neutral countenance, as a sort of
Commination-service, which, though offensive, had to be gone
through once now and then to frighten the flock for their
A voice came from behind some laurel-bushes into which the
"Poor dear!  Did a nasty brute of a dog want to kill it; --
"I beg your pardon," said Oak to the voice, "but George was
walking on behind me with a temper as mild as milk."
Almost before he had ceased speaking, Oak was seized with a
misgiving as to whose ear was the recipient of his answer.
Nobody appeared, and he heard the person retreat among the
Gabriel meditated, and so deeply that he brought small
furrows into his forehead by sheer force of reverie.  Where
the issue of an interview is as likely to be a vast change
for the worse as for the better, any initial difference from
expectation causes nipping sensations of failure.  Oak went
up to the door a little abashed:  his mental rehearsal and
Bathsheba's aunt was indoors.  "Will you tell Miss Everdene
that somebody would be glad to speak to her?" said Mr. Oak.
(Calling one's self merely Somebody, without giving a name,
is not to be taken as an example of the ill-breeding of the
rural world: it springs from a refined modesty, of which
townspeople, with their cards and announcements, have no
Bathsheba was out.  The voice had evidently been hers.
"Oh, thank 'ee," said Gabriel, following her to the
fireplace.  "I've brought a lamb for Miss Everdene.  I
"She might," said Mrs. Hurst, musingly; "though she's only a
visitor here.  If you will wait a minute, Bathsheba will be
"Yes, I will wait," said Gabriel, sitting down.  "The lamb
isn't really the business I came about, Mrs. Hurst.  In
short, I was going to ask her if she'd like to be married."
"Yes.  Because if she would, I should be very glad to marry
her.  D'ye know if she's got any other young man hanging
superfluously....  "Yes -- bless you, ever so many young
men.  You see, Farmer Oak, she's so good-looking, and an
excellent scholar besides -- she was going to be a governess
once, you know, only she was too wild.  Not that her young
men ever come here -- but, Lord, in the nature of women, she
"That's unfortunate," said Farmer Oak, contemplating a crack
in the stone floor with sorrow.  "I'm only an every-day sort
of man, and my only chance was in being the first comer...
Well, there's no use in my waiting, for that was all I came
about: so I'll take myself off home-along, Mrs. Hurst."
When Gabriel had gone about two hundred yards along the
down, he heard a "hoi-hoi!" uttered behind him, in a piping
note of more treble quality than that in which the
exclamation usually embodies itself when shouted across a
field.  He looked round, and saw a girl racing after him,
Oak stood still -- and the runner drew nearer.  It was
Bathsheba Everdene.  Gabriel's colour deepened: hers was
already deep, not, as it appeared, from emotion, but from
"Farmer Oak -- I ----" she said, pausing for want of breath
pulling up in front of him with a slanted face and putting
"I have just called to see you," said Gabriel, pending her
"Yes -- I know that," she said panting like a robin, her
face red and moist from her exertions, like a peony petal
before the sun dries off the dew.  "I didn't know you had
come to ask to have me, or I should have come in from the
garden instantly.  I ran after you to say -- that my aunt
made a mistake in sending you away from courting me ----"
Gabriel expanded. "I'm sorry to have made you run so fast,
my dear," he said, with a grateful sense of favours to come.
"-- It was quite a mistake-aunt's telling you I had a young
man already," Bathsheba went on.  "I haven't a sweetheart at
all -- and I never had one, and I thought that, as times go
with women, it was SUCH a pity to send you away thinking
"Really and truly I am glad to hear that!" said Farmer Oak,
smiling one of his long special smiles, and blushing with
gladness.  He held out his hand to take hers, which, when
she had eased her side by pressing it there, was prettily
extended upon her bosom to still her loud-beating heart.
Directly he seized it she put it behind her, so that it
"I have a nice snug little farm," said Gabriel, with half a
degree less assurance than when he had seized her hand.
"A man has advanced me money to begin with, but still, it
will soon be paid off and though I am only an every-day sort
of man, I have got on a little since I was a boy." Gabriel
uttered "a little" in a tone to show her that it was the
complacent form of "a great deal."  He continued: "When we
be married, I am quite sure I can work twice as hard as I do
He went forward and stretched out his arm again.  Bathsheba
had overtaken him at a point beside which stood a low
stunted holly bush, now laden with red berries.  Seeing his
advance take the form of an attitude threatening a possible
enclosure, if not compression, of her person, she edged off
"Why, Farmer Oak," she said, over the top, looking at him
with rounded eyes, "I never said I was going to marry you."
"Well -- that IS a tale!" said Oak, with dismay." To run
after anybody like this, and then say you don't want him!"
"What I meant to tell you was only this," she said eagerly,
and yet half conscious of the absurdity of the position she
had made for herself -- "that nobody has got me yet as a
sweetheart, instead of my having a dozen, as my aunt said;
I HATE to be thought men's property in that way, though
possibly I shall be had some day.  Why, if I'd wanted you I
shouldn't have run after you like this; 'twould have been
the FORWARDEST thing!  But there was no harm in hurrying to
correct a piece of false news that had been told you."
"Oh, no -- no harm at all."  But there is such a thing as
being too generous in expressing a judgment impulsively, and
Oak added with a more appreciative sense of all the
circumstances -- "Well, I am not quite certain it was no
"Indeed, I hadn't time to think before starting whether I
wanted to marry or not, for you'd have been gone over the
"Come," said Gabriel, freshening again; "think a minute or
two.  I'll wait a while, Miss Everdene.  Will you marry me?
"I'll try to think," she observed, rather more timorously;
"if I can think out of doors; my mind spreads away so."
"Then give me time."  Bathsheba looked thoughtfully into the
distance, away from the direction in which Gabriel stood.
"I can make you happy," said he to the back of her head,
across the bush.  "You shall have a piano in a year or two --
farmers' wives are getting to have pianos now -- and I'll
practise up the flute right well to play with you in the
"And have one of those little ten-pound" gigs for market --
and nice flowers, and birds -- cocks and hens I mean,
because they be useful," continued Gabriel, feeling balanced
"And a frame for cucumbers -- like a gentleman and lady.
"And when the wedding was over, we'd have it put in the
"And the babies in the births -- every man jack of 'em!  And
at home by the fire, whenever you look up, there I shall be
Her countenance fell, and she was silent awhile.  He
regarded the red berries between them over and over again,
to such an extent, that holly seemed in his after life to be
a cypher signifying a proposal of marriage.  Bathsheba
"No;" 'tis no use," she said.  "I don't want to marry you."
"I have tried hard all the time I've been thinking; for a
marriage would be very nice in one sense.  People would talk
about me, and think I had won my battle, and I should feel
"Why, he'd always be there, as you say; whenever I looked
"Well, what I mean is that I shouldn't mind being a bride at
a wedding, if I could be one without having a husband.  But
since a woman can't show off in that way by herself, I
At this criticism of her statement Bathsheba made an
addition to her dignity by a slight sweep away from him.
"Upon my heart and soul, I don't know what a maid can say
stupider than that," said Oak.  "But dearest," he continued
in a palliative voice, "don't be like it!" Oak sighed a deep
honest sigh -- none the less so in that, being like the sigh
of a pine plantation, it was rather noticeable as a
disturbance of the atmosphere.  "Why won't you have me?" he
appealed, creeping round the holly to reach her side.
"But why?" he persisted, standing still at last in despair
She contracted a yawn to an inoffensive smallness, so that
it was hardly ill-mannered at all.  "I don't love you," she
"But I love you -- and, as for myself, I am content to be
"Oh Mr. Oak -- that's very fine!  You'd get to despise me."
"Never," said Mr Oak, so earnestly that he seemed to be
coming, by the force of his words, straight through the bush
and into her arms.  "I shall do one thing in this life --
one thing certain -- that is, love you, and long for you,
and KEEP WANTING YOU till I die."  His voice had a genuine
pathos now, and his large brown hands perceptibly trembled.
"It seems dreadfully wrong not to have you when you feel so
much!" she said with a little distress, and looking
hopelessly around for some means of escape from her moral
dilemma.  "How I wish I hadn't run after you!" However she
seemed to have a short cut for getting back to cheerfulness,
and set her face to signify archness.  "It wouldn't do, Mr
Oak.  I want somebody to tame me; I am too independent; and
Oak cast his eyes down the field in a way implying that it
"Mr. Oak," she said, with luminous distinctness and common
sense, "you are better off than I.  I have hardly a penny in
the world -- I am staying with my aunt for my bare
sustenance.  I am better educated than you -- and I don't
love you a bit: that's my side of the case.  Now yours: you
are a farmer just begining; and you ought in common
prudence, if you marry at all (which you should certainly
not think of doing at present), to marry a woman with money,
who would stock a larger farm for you than you have now."
Gabriel looked at her with a little surprise and much
"That's the very thing I had been thinking myself!" he
Farmer Oak had one-and-a-half Christian characteristics too
many to succeed with Bathsheba:  his humility, and a
superfluous moiety of honesty.  Bathsheba was decidedly
"Well, then, why did you come and disturb me?" she said,
almost angrily, if not quite, an enlarging red spot rising
"I can't do what I think would be -- would be ----"
"You have made an admission NOW, Mr. Oak," she exclaimed,
with even more hauteur, and rocking her head disdainfully.
"After that, do you think I could marry you?  Not if I know
He broke in passionately.  "But don't mistake me like that!
Because I am open enough to own what every man in my shoes
would have thought of, you make your colours come up your
face, and get crabbed with me.  That about your not being
good enough for me is nonsense.  You speak like a lady --
all the parish notice it, and your uncle at Weatherbury is,
I have heerd, a large farmer -- much larger than ever I
shall be.  May I call in the evening, or will you walk along
with me o' Sundays?  I don't want you to make-up your mind
"No -- no -- I cannot.  Don't press me any more -- don't.  I
don't love you -- so 'twould be ridiculous," she said, with
No man likes to see his emotions the sport of a merry-go-
round of skittishness.  "Very well," said Oak, firmly, with
the bearing of one who was going to give his days and nights
to Ecclesiastes for ever.  "Then I'll ask you no more."
THE news which one day reached Gabriel, that Bathsheba
Everdene had left the neighbourhood, had an influence upon
him which might have surprised any who never suspected that
the more emphatic the renunciation the less absolute its
It may have been observed that there is no regulal path for
getting out of love as there is for getting in.  Some people
look upon marriage as a short cut that way, but it has been
known to fail.  Separation, which was the means that chance
offered to Gabriel Oak by Bathsheba's disappearance though
effectual with people of certain humours is apt to idealize
the removed object with others -- notably those whose
affection, placid and regular as it may be, flows deep and
long.  Oak belonged to the even-tempered order of humanity,
and felt the secret fusion of himself in Bathsheba to be
burning with a finer flame now that she was gone -- that was
His incipient friendship with her aunt had been nipped by
the failure of his suit, and all that Oak learnt of
Bathsheba's movements was done indirectly.  It appeared that
she had gone to a place called Weatherbury, more than twenty
miles off, but in what capacity -- whether as a visitor, or
Gabriel had two dogs.  George, the elder, exhibited an
ebony-tipped nose, surrounded by a narrow margin of pink
flesh, and a coat marked in random splotches approximating
in colour to white and slaty grey; but the grey, after years
of sun and rain, had been scorched and washed out of the
more prominent locks, leaving them of a reddish-brown, as if
the blue component of the grey had faded, like the indigo
from the same kind of colour in Turner's pictures.  In
substance it had originally been hair, but long contact with
sheep seemed to be turning it by degrees into wool of a poor
This dog had originally belonged to a shepherd of inferior
morals and dreadful temper, and the result was that George
knew the exact degrees of condemnation signified by cursing
and swearing of all descriptions better than the wickedest
old man in the neighbourhood.  Long experience had so
precisely taught the animal the difference between such
exclamations as "Come in!" and "D ---- ye, come in!" that he
knew to a hair's breadth the rate of trotting back from the
ewes' tails that each call involved, if a staggerer with the
sheep crook was to be escaped.  Though old, he was clever
The young dog, George's son, might possibly have been the
image of his mother, for there was not much resemblance
between him and George.  He was learning the sheep-keeping
business, so as to follow on at the flock when the other
should die, but had got no further than the rudiments as yet
-- still finding an insuperable difficulty in distinguishing
between doing a thing well enough and doing it too well.  So
earnest and yet so wrong-headed was this young dog (he had
no, name in particular, and answered with perfect readiness
to any pleasant interjection), that if sent behind the flock
to help them on, he did it so thoroughly that he would have
chased them across the whole county with the greatest
pleasure if not called off or reminded when to stop by the
Thus much for the dogs.  On the further side of Norcombe
Hill was a chalk-pit, from which chalk had been drawn for
generations, and spread over adjacent farms.  Two hedges
converged upon it in the form of a V, but without quite
meeting.  The narrow opening left, which was immediately
over the brow of the pit, was protected by a rough railing.
One night, when Farmer Oak had returned to, his house,
believing there would be no further necessity for his
attendance on the down, he called as usual to the dogs,
previously to shutting them up in the outhouse till next
morning.  Only one responded -- old George; the other could
not be found, either in the house, lane, or garden. Gabriel
then remembered that he had left the two dogs on the hill
eating a dead lamb (a kind of meat he usually kept from
them, except when other food ran short), and concluding that
the young one had not finished his meal, he went indoors to
the luxury of a bed, which latterly he had only enjoyed on
It was a still, moist night.  Just before dawn he was
assisted in waking by the abnormal reverberation of familiar
music.  To the shepherd, the note of the sheep-bell, like
the ticking of the clock to other people, is a chronic sound
that only makes itself noticed by ceasing or altering in
some unusual manner from the well-known idle twinkle which
signifies to the accustomed ear, however distant, that all
is well in the fold.  In the solemn calm of the awakening
morn that note was heard by Gabriel, beating with unusual
violence and rapidity. This exceptional ringing may be
caused in two ways -- by the rapid feeding of the sheep
bearing the bell, as when the flock breaks into new pasture,
which gives it an intermittent rapidity, or by the sheep
starting off in a run, when the sound has a regular
palpitation.  The experienced ear of Oak knew the sound he
now heard to be caused by the running of the flock with
He jumped out of bed, dressed, tore down the lane through a
foggy dawn, and ascended the hill.  The forward ewes were
kept apart from those among which the fall of lambs would be
later, there being two hundred of the latter class in
Gabriel's flock.  These two hundred seemed to have
absolutely vanished from the hill.  There were the fifty
with their lambs, enclosed at the other end as he had left
them, but the rest, forming the bulk of the flock, were
nowhere.  Gabriel called at the top of his voice the
Not a single bleat.  He went to the hedge; a gap had been
broken through it, and in the gap were the footprints of the
sheep.  Rather surprised to find them break fence at this
season, yet putting it down instantly to their great
fondness for ivy in winter-time, of which a great deal grew
in the plantation, he followed through the hedge.  They were
not in the plantation.  He called again:  the valleys and
farthest hills resounded as when the sailors invoked the
lost Hylas on the Mysian shore; but no sheep.  He passed
through the trees and along the ridge of the hill.  On the
extreme summit, where the ends of the two converging hedges
of which we have spoken were stopped short by meeting the
brow of the chalk-pit, he saw the younger dog standing
against the sky -- dark and motionless as Napoleon at St.
A horrible conviction darted through Oak.  With a sensation
of bodily faintness he advanced:  at one point the rails
were broken through, and there he saw the footprints of his
ewes.  The dog came up, licked his hand, and made signs
implying that he expected some great reward for signal
services rendered.  Oak looked over the precipice.  The ewes
lay dead and dying at its foot -- a heap of two hundred
mangled carcasses, representing in their condition just now
Oak was an intensely humane man: indeed, his humanity often
tore in pieces any politic intentions of his which bordered
on strategy, and carried him on as by gravitation.  A shadow
in his life had always been that his flock ended in mutton --
that a day came and found every shepherd an arrant traitor
to his defenseless sheep.  His first feeling now was one of
pity for the untimely fate of these gentle ewes and their
It was a second to remember another phase of the matter.
The sheep were not insured.  All the savings of a frugal
life had been dispersed at a blow; his hopes of being an
independent farmer were laid low -- possibly for ever.
Gabriel's energies, patience, and industry had been so
severely taxed during the years of his life between eighteen
and eight-and-twenty, to reach his present stage of progress
that no more seemed to be left in him.  He leant down upon a
Stupors, however, do not last for ever, and Farmer Oak
recovered from his.  It was as remarkable as it was
characteristic that the one sentence he uttered was in
"Thank God I am not married:  what would she have done in
Oak raised his head, and wondering what he could do,
listlessly surveyed the scene.  By the outer margin of the
Pit was an oval pond, and over it hung the attenuated
skeleton of a chrome-yellow moon which had only a few days
to last -- the morning star dogging her on the left hand.
The pool glittered like a dead man's eye, and as the world
awoke a breeze blew, shaking and elongating the reflection
of the moon without breaking it, and turning the image of
the star to a phosphoric streak upon the water.  All this
As far as could be learnt it appeared that the poor young
dog, still under the impression that since he was kept for
running after sheep, the more he ran after them the better,
had at the end of his meal off the dead lamb, which may have
given him additional energy and spirits, collected all the
ewes into a corner, driven the timid creatures through the
hedge, across the upper field, and by main force of worrying
had given them momentum enough to break down a portion of
the rotten railing, and so hurled them over the edge.
George's son had done his work so thoroughly that he was
considered too good a workman to live, and was, in fact,
taken and tragically shot at twelve o'clock that same day --
another instance of the untoward fate which so often attends
dogs and other philosophers who follow out a train of
reasoning to its logical conclusion, and attempt perfectly
consistent conduct in a world made up so largely of
Gabriel's farm had been stocked by a dealer -- on the
strength of Oak's promising look and character -- who was
receiving a percentage from the farmer till such time as the
advance should be cleared off. Oak found that the value of
stock, plant, and implements which were really his own would
be about sufficient to pay his debts, leaving himself a free
man with the clothes he stood up in, and nothing more.
TWO months passed away.  We are brought on to a day in
February, on which was held the yearly statute or hiring
At one end of the street stood from two to three hundred
blithe and hearty labourers waiting upon Chance -- all men
of the stamp to whom labour suggests nothing worse than a
wrestle with gravitation, and pleasure nothing better than a
renunciation of the same. Among these, carters and waggoners
were distinguished by having a piece of whip-cord twisted
round their hats; thatchers wore a fragment of woven straw;
shepherds held their sheep-crooks in their hands; and thus
the situation required was known to the hirers at a glance.
In the crowd was an athletic young fellow of some-what
superior appearance to the rest -- in fact, his superiority
was marked enough to lead several ruddy peasants standing by
to speak to him inquiringly, as to a farmer, and to use
'Sir' as a finishing word.  His answer always was, --
"I am looking for a place myself -- a bailiff's.  Do ye know
Gabriel was paler now.  His eyes were more meditative, and
his expression was more sad.  He had passed through an
ordeal of wretchedness which had given him more than it had
taken away.  He had sunk from his modest elevation as
pastoral king into the very slime-pits of Siddim; but there
was left to him a dignified calm he had never before known,
and that indifference to fate which, though it often makes a
villain of a man, is the basis of his sublimity when it does
not.  And thus the abasement had been exaltation, and the
In the morning a regiment of cavalry had left the town, and
a sergeant and his party had been beating up for recruits
through the four streets.  As the end of the day drew on,
and he found himself not hired, Gabriel almost wished that
he had joined them, and gone off to serve his country.
Weary of standing in the market-place, and not much minding
the kind of work he turned his hand to, he decided to offer
himself in some other capacity than that of bailiff.
All the farmers seemed to be wanting shepherds.  Sheep-
tending was Gabriel's speciality.  Turning down an obscure
street and entering an obscurer lane, he went up to a
"How long would it take you to make a shepherd's crook?"
He sat on a bench and the crook was made, a stem being given
He then went to a ready-made clothes' shop, the owner of
which had a large rural connection.  As the crook had
absorbed most of Gabriel's money, he attempted, and carried
out, an exchange of his overcoat for a shepherd's regulation
This transaction having been completed, he again hurried off
to the centre of the town, and stood on the kerb of the
Now that Oak had turned himself into a shepherd, it seemed
that bailifs were most in demand.  However, two or three
farmers noticed him and drew near.  Dialogues followed, more
This reply invariably operated like a rumour of cholera.
The inquiring farmer would edge away and shake his head
dubiously.  Gabriel, like his dog, was too good to be
trustworthy, and he never made advance beyond this point.
It is safer to accept any chance that offers itself, and
extemporize a procedure to fit it, than to get a good
shepherd, but had laid himself out for anything in the whole
cycle of labour that was required in the fair.  It grew
dusk.  Some merry men were whistling and singing by the
corn-exchange.  Gabriel's hand, which had lain for some time
idle in his smock-frock pocket, touched his flute which he
carried there.  Here was an opportunity for putting his
He drew out his flute and began to play "Jockey to the Fair"
in the style of a man who had never known moment's sorrow.
Oak could pipe with Arcadian sweetness and the sound of the
well-known notes cheered his own heart as well as those of
the loungers.  He played on with spirit, and in half an hour
had earned in pence what was a small fortune to a destitute
By making inquiries he learnt that there was another fair at
Weatherbury!  It was where Bathsheba had gone two months
before.  This information was like coming from night into
Bathsheba had probably left Weatherbury long before this
time, but the place had enough interest attaching to it to
lead Oak to choose Shottsford fair as his next field of
inquiry, because it lay in the Weatherbury quarter.
uninteresting intrinsically.  If report spoke truly they
were as hardy, merry, thriving, wicked a set as any in the
whole county.  Oak resolved to sleep at Weatherbury that
night on his way to Shottsford, and struck out at once into
the high road which had been recommended as the direct route
The road stretched through water-meadows traversed by little
brooks, whose quivering surfaces were braided along their
centres, and folded into creases at the sides; or, where the
flow was more rapid, the stream was pied with spots of white
froth, which rode on in undisturbed serenity.  On the higher
levels the dead and dry carcasses of leaves tapped the
ground as they bowled along helter-skelter upon the
shoulders of the wind, and little birds in the hedges were
comfortably for the night, retaining their places if Oak
kept moving, but flying away if he stopped to look at them.
He passed by Yalbury Wood where the game-birds were rising
to their roosts, and heard the crack-voiced cock-pheasants
"cu-uck, cuck," and the wheezy whistle of the hens.
By the time he had walked three or four miles every shape in
the landscape had assumed a uniform hue of blackness.  He
descended Yalbury Hill and could just discern ahead of him a
waggon, drawn up under a great over-hanging tree by the
On coming close, he found there were no horses attached to
it, the spot being apparently quite deserted.  The waggon,
from its position, seemed to have been left there for the
night, for beyond about half a truss of hay which was heaped
in the bottom, it was quite empty.  Gabriel sat down on the
shafts of the vehicle and considered his position.  He
calculated that he had walked a very fair proportion of the
journey; and having been on foot since daybreak, he felt
tempted to lie down upon the hay in the waggon instead of
pushing on to the village of Weatherbury, and having to pay
Eating his last slices of bread and ham, and drinking from
the bottle of cider he had taken the precaution to bring
with him, he got into the lonely waggon.  Here he spread
half of the hay as a bed, and, as well as he could in the
darkness, pulled the other half over him by way of bed-
clothes, covering himself entirely, and feeling, physically,
as comfortable as ever he had been in his life.  Inward
introspective far beyond his neighbours, to banish quite,
whilst conning the present untoward page of his history.
So, thinking of his misfortunes, amorous and pastoral he
fell asleep, shepherds enjoying, in common with sailors, the
privilege of being able to summon the god instead of having
On somewhat suddenly awaking, after a sleep of whose length
he had no idea, Oak found that the waggon was in motion.  He
considerable for a vehicle without springs, and under
circumstances of physical uneasiness, his head being dandled
up and down on the bed of the waggon like a kettledrum-
stick.  He then distinguished voices in conversation, coming
from the forpart of the waggon.  His concern at this dilemma
(which would have been alarm, had he been a thriving man;
but misfortune is a fine opiate to personal terror) led him
to peer cautiously from the hay, and the first sight he
beheld was the stars above him.  Charles's Wain was getting
towards a right angle with the Pole star, and Gabriel
concluded that it must be about nine o'clock -- in other
words, that he had slept two hours.  This small astronomical
calculation was made without any positive effort, and whilst
he was stealthily turning to discover, if possible, into
Two figures were dimly visible in front, sitting with their
legs outside the waggon, one of whom was driving.  Gabriel
soon found that this was the waggoner, and it appeared they
A conversation was in progress, which continued thus: --
"Be as 'twill, she's a fine handsome body as far's looks be
concerned.  But that's only the skin of the woman, and these
dandy cattle be as proud as a lucifer in their insides."
"Ay -- so 'a do seem, Billy Smallbury -- so 'a do seem."
This utterance was very shaky by nature, and more so by
circumstance, the jolting of the waggon not being without
its effect upon the speaker's larynx.  It came from the man
"She's a very vain feymell -- so 'tis said here and there."
"Ah, now.  If so be 'tis like that, I can't look her in the
face.  Lord, no:  not I -- heh-heh-heh!  Such a shy man as I
"Yes -- she's very vain.  'Tis said that every night at
going to bed she looks in the glass to put on her night-cap
"And 'a can play the peanner, so 'tis said.  Can play so
clever that 'a can make a psalm tune sound as well as the
"D'ye tell o't!  A happy time for us, and I feel quite a new
On hearing these and other similar remarks, a wild thought
flashed into Gabriel's mind that they might be speaking of
Bathsheba.  There were, however, no ground for retaining
such a supposition, for the waggon, though going in the
direction of Weatherbury, might be going beyond it, and the
woman alluded to seemed to be the mistress of some estate.
They were now apparently close upon Weatherbury and not to
alarm the speakers unnecessarily, Gabriel slipped out of the
He turned to an opening in the hedge, which he found to be a
gate, and mounting thereon, he sat meditating whether to
seek a cheap lodging in the village, or to ensure a cheaper
one by lying under some hay or corn-stack.  The crunching
jangle of the waggon died upon his ear.  He was about to
walk on, when he noticed on his left hand an unusual light --
appearing about half a mile distant.  Oak watched it, and
Gabriel again mounted the gate, and, leaping down on the
other side upon what he found to be ploughed soil, made
across the field in the exact direction of the fire.  The
blaze, enlarging in a double ratio by his approach and its
own increase, showed him as he drew nearer the outlines of
ricks beside it, lighted up to great distinctness.  A rick-
yard was the source of the fire.  His weary face now began
to be painted over with a rich orange glow, and the whole
front of his smock-frock and gaiters was covered with a
dancing shadow pattern of thorn-twigs -- the light reaching
him through a leafless intervening hedge -- and the metallic
curve of his sheep-crook shone silver-bright in the same
abounding rays.  He came up to the boundary fence, and stood
to regain breath.  It seemed as if the spot was unoccupied
The fire was issuing from a long straw-stack, which was so
far gone as to preclude a possibility of saving it.  A rick
burns differently from a house.  As the wind blows the fire
inwards, the portion in flames completely disappears like
melting sugar, and the outline is lost to the eye.  However,
a hay or a wheat-rick, well put together, will resist
combustion for a length of time, if it begins on the
This before Gabriel's eyes was a rick of straw, loosely put
together, and the flames darted into it with lightning
swiftness.  It glowed on the windward side, rising and
falling in intensity, like the coal of a cigar.  Then a
superincumbent bundle rolled down, with a whisking noise;
flames elongated, and bent themselves about with a quiet
roar, but no crackle.  Banks of smoke went off horizontally
at the back like passing clouds, and behind these burned
hidden pyres, illuminating the semi-transparent sheet of
smoke to a lustrous yellow uniformity.  Individual straws in
the foreground were consumed in a creeping movement of ruddy
heat, as if they were knots of red worms, and above shone
imaginary fiery faces, tongues hanging from lips, glaring
eyes, and other impish forms, from which at intervals sparks
Oak suddenly ceased from being a mere spectator by
discovering the case to be more serious than he had at first
imagined.  A scroll of smoke blew aside and revealed to him
a wheat-rick in startling juxtaposition with the decaying
one, and behind this a series of others, composing the main
corn produce of the farm; so that instead of the straw-stack
standing, as he had imagined comparatively isolated, there
was a regular connection between it and the remaining stacks
Gabriel leapt over the hedge, and saw that he was not alone.
The first man he came to was running about in a great hurry,
as if his thoughts were several yards in advance of his
"O, man -- fire, fire!  A good master and a bad servant is
fire, fire! -- I mane a bad servant and a good master.  Oh,
Mark Clark -- come!  And you, Billy Smallbury -- and you,
Maryann Money -- and you, Jan Coggan, and Matthew there!"
Other figures now appeared behind this shouting man and
among the smoke, and Gabriel found that, far from being
alone he was in a great company -- whose shadows danced
merrily up and down, timed by the jigging of the flames, and
not at all by their owners' movements.  The assemblage --
belonging to that class of society which casts its thoughts
into the form of feeling, and its feelings into the form of
commotion -- set to work with a remarkable confusion of
"Stop the draught under the wheat-rick!" cried Gabriel to
those nearest to him.  The corn stood on stone staddles, and
between these, tongues of yellow hue from the burning straw
licked and darted playfully.  If the fire once got UNDER
A rick-cloth was brought, and they hung it like a curtain
across the channel.  The flames immediately ceased to go
under the bottom of the corn-stack, and stood up vertical.
"Stand here with a bucket of water and keep the cloth wet."
The flames, now driven upwards, began to attack the angles
"The ladder was against the straw-rick and is burnt to a
Oak seized the cut ends of the sheaves, as if he were going
to engage in the operation of "reed-drawing," and digging in
his feet, and occasionally sticking in the stem of his
sheep-crook, he clambered up the beetling face.  He at once
sat astride the very apex, and began with his crook to beat
off the fiery fragments which had lodged thereon, shouting
to the others to get him a bough and a ladder, and some
Billy Smallbury -- one of the men who had been on the waggon
-- by this time had found a ladder, which Mark Clark
ascended, holding on beside Oak upon the thatch.  The smoke
at this corner was stifling, and Clark, a nimble fellow,
having been handed a bucket of water, bathed Oak's face and
sprinkled him generally, whilst Gabriel, now with a long
beech-bough in one hand, in addition to his crook in the
other, kept sweeping the stack and dislodging all fiery
On the ground the groups of villagers were still occupied in
doing all they could to keep down the conflagration, which
was not much.  They were all tinged orange, and backed up by
shadows of varying pattern.  Round the corner of the largest
stack, out of the direct rays of the fire, stood a pony,
bearing a young woman on its back.  By her side was another
woman, on foot.  These two seemed to keep at a distance from
the fire, that the horse might not become restive.
"He's a shepherd," said the woman on foot.  "Yes -- he is.
See how his crook shines as he beats the rick with it.  And
his smock-frock is burnt in two holes, I declare!  A fine
"Whose shepherd is he?" said the equestrian in a clear
"Nobody at all -- I've asked 'em.  Quite a stranger, they
The young woman on the pony rode out from the shade and
"D'ye think the barn is safe, Jan Coggan?" said the second
woman, passing on the question to the nearest man in that
"Safe-now -- leastwise I think so.  If this rick had gone
the barn would have followed.  'Tis that bold shepherd up
there that have done the most good -- he sitting on the top
o' rick, whizzing his great long-arms about like a
"He does work hard," said the young woman on horseback,
looking up at Gabriel through her thick woollen veil.  "I
wish he was shepherd here.  Don't any of you know his name."
"Never heard the man's name in my life, or seed his form
The fire began to get worsted, and Gabriel's elevated
position being no longer required of him, he made as if to
"Maryann," said the girl on horseback, "go to him as he
comes down, and say that the farmer wishes to thank him for
Maryann stalked off towards the rick and met Oak at the foot
"Where is your master the farmer?" asked Gabriel, kindling
with the idea of getting employment that seemed to strike
"Ay, 'a b'lieve, and a rich one too!" said a bystander.
"Lately 'a came here from a distance.  Took on her uncle's
farm, who died suddenly.  Used to measure his money in half-
pint cups.  They say now that she've business in every bank
in Casterbridge, and thinks no more of playing pitch-and-
toss sovereign than you and I, do pitch-halfpenny -- not a
"That's she, back there upon the pony," said Maryann.  "wi'
her face a-covered up in that black cloth with holes in it."
Oak, his features smudged, grimy, and undiscoverable from
the smoke and heat, his smock-frock burnt into holes and
dripping with water, the ash stem of his sheep-crook charred
six inches shorter, advansed with the humility stern
adversity had thrust upon him up to the slight female form
in the saddle.  He lifted his hat with respect, and not
without gallantry: stepping close to her hanging feet he
She lifted the wool veil tied round her face, and looked all
astonishment.  Gabriel and his cold-hearted darling,
Bathsheba did not speak, and he mechanically repeated in an
BATHSHEBA withdrew into the shade.  She scarcely knew
whether most to be amused at the singularity of the meeting,
or to be concerned at its awkwardness.  There was room for a
little pity, also for a very little exultation:  the former
at his position, the latter at her own.  Embarrassed she was
not, and she remembered Gabriel's declaration of love to her
at Norcombe only to think she had nearly forgotten it.
"Yes," she murmured, putting on an air of dignity, and
turning again to him with a little warmth of cheek; "I do
"He's the very man, ma'am," said one of the villagers,
Conviction breeds conviction.  "Ay, that 'a is," said a
"Then will you tell him to speak to the bailiff, said
All was practical again now.  A summer eve and loneliness
would have been necessary to give the meeting its proper
The bailiff was pointed out to Gabriel, who, checking the
palpitation within his breast at discovering that this
Ashtoreth of strange report was only a modification of Venus
the well-known and admired, retired with him to talk over
The fire before them wasted away.  "Men," said Bathsheba,
"you shall take a little refreshment after this extra work.
"We could knock in a bit and a drop a good deal freer, Miss,
if so be ye'd send it to Warren's Malthouse," replied the
Bathsheba then rode off into the darkness, and the men
straggled on to the village in twos and threes -- Oak and
"And now," said the bailiff, finally, "all is settled, I
think, about your coming, and I am going home-along.  Good-
"That I can't, indeed," he said, moving past Oak as a
Christian edges past an offertory-plate when he does not
mean to contribute.  "If you follow on the road till you
come to Warren's Malthouse, where they are all gone to have
their snap of victuals, I daresay some of 'em will tell you
The bailiff who showed this nervous dread of loving his
neighbour as himself, went up the hill, and Oak walked on to
the village, still astonished at the rencounter with
Bathsheba, glad of his nearness to her, and perplexed at the
rapidity with which the unpractised girl of Norcombe had
developed into the supervising and cool woman here.  But
some women only require an emergency to make them fit for
Obliged, to some extent, to forgo dreaming in order to find
the way, he reached the churchyard, and passed round it
under the wall where several ancient trees grew.  There was
a wide margin of grass along here, and Gabriel's footsteps
were deadened by its softness, even at this indurating
period of the year.  When abreast of a trunk which appeared
to be the oldest of the old, he became aware that a figure
was standing behind it.  Gabriel did not pause in his walk,
and in another moment he accidentally kicked a loose stone.
The noise was enough to disturb the motionless stranger, who
The voice was unexpectedly attractive; it was the low and
dulcet note suggestive of romance; common in descriptions,
"I'll thank you to tell me if I'm in the way for Warren's
Malthouse?" Gabriel resumed, primarily to gain the
"Quite right.  It's at the bottom of the hill.  And do you
know ----" The girl hesitated and then went on again.  "Do
you know how late they keep open the Buck's Head Inn?" She
seemed to be won by Gabriel's heartiness, as Gabriel had
"I don't know where the Buck's Head is, or anything about
"Yes ----" The woman again paused.  There was no necessity
for any continuance of speech, and the fact that she did add
more seemed to proceed from an unconscious desire to show
unconcern by making a remark, which is noticeable in the
ingenuous when they are acting by stealth.  "You are not a
"I am not.  I am the new shepherd -- just arrived."
"Only a shepherd -- and you seem almost a farmer by your
"Only a shepherd," Gabriel repeated, in a dull cadence of
finality.  "His thoughts were directed to the past, his eyes
to the feet of the girl; and for the first time he saw lying
there a bundle of some sort.  She may have perceived the
"You won't say anything in the parish about having seen me
here, will you -- at least, not for a day or two?"
"Thank you, indeed," the other replied.  "I am rather poor,
and I don't want people to know anything about me."  Then
"You ought to have a cloak on such a cold night," Gabriel
"O no!  Would you mind going on and leaving me?  I thank you
"I will go on," he said; adding hesitatingly, -- "Since you
are not very well off, perhaps you would accept this trifle
from me.  It is only a shilling, but it is all I have to
"Yes, I will take it," said the stranger gratefully.
She extended her hand; Gabriel his.  In feeling for each
other's palm in the gloom before the money could be passed,
a minute incident occurred which told much.  Gabriel's
fingers alighted on the young woman's wrist.  It was beating
with a throb of tragic intensity.  He had frequently felt
the same quick, hard beat in the femoral artery of -- his
lambs when overdriven.  It suggested a consumption too great
of a vitality which, to judge from her figure and stature,
"No, no, no!  Let your having seen me be a secret!"
The young girl remained motionless by the tree, and Gabriel
descended into the village of Weatherbury, or Lower
Longpuddle as it was sometimes called.  He fancied that he
had felt himself in the penumbra of a very deep sadness when
touching that slight and fragile creature.  But wisdom lies
in moderating mere impressions, and Gabriel endeavoured to
WARREN'S Malthouse was enclosed by an old wall inwrapped
with ivy, and though not much of the exterior was visible at
this hour, the character and purposes of the building were
clearly enough shown by its outline upon the sky.  From the
walls an overhanging thatched roof sloped up to a point in
the centre, upon which rose a small wooden lantern, fitted
with louvre-boards on all the four sides, and from these
openings a mist was dimly perceived to be escaping into the
night air.  There was no window in front; but a square hole
in the door was glazed with a single pane, through which
red, comfortable rays now stretched out upon the ivied wall
Oak's hand skimmed the surface of the door with fingers
extended to an Elymas-the-Sorcerer pattern, till he found a
leathern strap, which he pulled.  This lifted a wooden
The room inside was lighted only by the, ruddy glow from the
kiln mouth, which shone over the floor with the streaming,
horizontality of the setting sun, and threw upwards the
shadows of all facial irregularities in those assembled
around.  The stone-flag floor was worn into a path from the
doorway to the kiln, and into undulations everywhere.  A
curved settle of unplaned oak stretched along one side, and
in a remote corner was a small bed and bedstead, the owner
This aged man was now sitting opposite the fire, his frosty
white hair and beard overgrowing his gnarled figure like the
grey moss and lichen upon a leafless apple-tree.  He wore
breeches and the laced-up shoes called ankle-jacks; he kept
Gabriel's nose was greeted by an atmosphere laden with the
sweet smell of new malt.  The conversation (which seemed to
have been concerning the origin of the fire) immediately
ceased, and every one ocularly criticised him to the degree
expressed by contracting the flesh of their foreheads and
looking at him with narrowed eyelids, as if he had been a
light too strong for their sight.  Several exclaimed
meditatively, after this operation had been completed: --
"We thought we heard a hand pawing about the door for the
bobbin, but weren't sure 'twere not a dead leaf blowed
across," said another.  "Come in, shepherd; sure ye be
The ancient maltster sitting in the midst turned up this --
his turning being as the turning of a rusty crane.
"That's never Gable Oak's grandson over at Norcombe --
never!" he said, as a formula expressive of surprise, which
nobody was supposed for a moment to take literally.
"My father and my grandfather were old men of the name of
"Thought I knowed the man's face as I seed him on the rick!
-- thought I did!  And where be ye trading o't to now,
"Knowed yer grandfather for years and years!" continued the
maltster, the words coming forth of their own accord as if
the momentum previously imparted had been sufficient.
"Likewise knowed yer father when he was a child.  Why, my
boy Jacob there and your father were sworn brothers -- that
"Ay, sure," said his son, a young man about sixty-five, with
a semi-bald head and one tooth in the left centre of his
upper jaw, which made much of itself by standing prominent,
like a milestone in a bank.  "But 'twas Joe had most to do
with him.  However, my son William must have knowed the very
man afore us -- didn't ye, Billy, afore ye left Norcombe?"
"No, 'twas Andrew," said Jacob's son Billy, a child of
forty, or thereabouts, who manifested the peculiarity of
possessing a cheerful soul in a gloomy body, and whose
whiskers were assuming a chinchilla shade here and there.
"I can mind Andrew," said Oak, "as being a man in the place
"Ay -- the other day I and my youngest daughter, Liddy, were
over at my grandson's christening," continued Billy.  "We
were talking about this very family, and 'twas only last
Purification Day in this very world, when the use-money is
gied away to the second-best poor folk, you know, shepherd,
and I can mind the day because they all had to traypse up to
"Come, shepherd, and drink.  'Tis gape and swaller with us --
a drap of sommit, but not of much account," said the
maltster, removing from the fire his eyes, which were
vermilion-red and bleared by gazing into it for so many
years.  "Take up the God-forgive-me, Jacob.  See if 'tis
Jacob stooped to the God-forgive-me, which was a two-handled
tall mug standing in the ashes, cracked and charred with
heat:  it was rather furred with extraneous matter about the
outside, especially in the crevices of the handles, the
innermost curves of which may not have seen daylight for
several years by reason of this encrustation thereon --
formed of ashes accidentally wetted with cider and baked
hard; but to the mind of any sensible drinker the cup was no
worse for that, being incontestably clean on the inside and
about the rim.  It may be observed that such a class of mug
is called a God-forgive-me in Weatherbury and its vicinity
for uncertain reasons; probably because its size makes any
given toper feel ashamed of himself when he sees its bottom
Jacob, on receiving the order to see if the liquor was warm
enough, placidly dipped his forefinger into it by way of
thermometer, and having pronounced it nearly of the proper
degree, raised the cup and very civilly attempted to dust
some of the ashes from the bottom with the skirt of his
"No -- not at all," said Gabriel, in a reproving tone of
considerateness.  "I never fuss about dirt in its pure
state, and when I know what sort it is."  Taking the mug he
drank an inch or more from the depth of its contents, and
duly passed it to the next man.  "I wouldn't think of giving
such trouble to neighbours in washing up when there's so
much work to be done in the world already." continued Oak in
a moister tone, after recovering from the stoppage of breath
"True, true; it can't be gainsaid!" observed a brisk young
man -- Mark Clark by name, a genial and pleasant gentleman,
whom to meet anywhere in your travels was to know, to know
was to drink with, and to drink with was, unfortunately, to
"And here's a mouthful of bread and bacon that mis'ess have
sent, shepherd.  The cider will go down better with a bit of
victuals.  Don't ye chaw quite close, shepherd, for I let
the bacon fall in the road outside as I was bringing it
along, and may be 'tis rather gritty.  There, 'tis clane
dirt; and we all know what that is, as you say, and you
"True, true -- not at all," said the friendly Oak.
"Don't let your teeth quite meet, and you won't feel the
sandiness at all.  Ah! 'tis wonderful what can be done by
"Ah, he's his grandfer's own grandsonn! -- his grandfer were
just such a nice unparticular man!" said the maltster.
"Drink, Henry Fray -- drink," magnanimously said Jan Coggan,
a person who held Saint-Simonian notions of share and share
alike where liquor was concerned, as the vessel showed signs
of approaching him in its gradual revolution among them.
Having at this moment reached the end of a wistful gaze into
mid-air, Henry did not refuse.  He was a man of more than
middle age, with eyebrows high up in his forehead, who laid
it down that the law of the world was bad, with a long-
suffering look through his listeners at the world alluded
to, as it presented itself to his imagination.  He always
signed his name "Henery" -- strenuously insisting upon that
spelling, and if any passing schoolmaster ventured to remark
that the second "e" was superfluous and old-fashioned, he
received the reply that "H-e-n-e-r-y" was the name he was
christened and the name he would stick to -- in the tone of
one to whom orthographical differences were matters which
Mr. Jan Coggan, who had passed the cup to Henery, was a
crimson man with a spacious countenance, and private glimmer
in his eye, whose name had appeared on the marriage register
of Weatherbury and neighbouring parishes as best man and
chief witness in countless unions of the previous twenty
years; he also very frequently filled the post of head
"Come, Mark Clark -- come.  Ther's plenty more in the
"Ay -- that I will, 'tis my only doctor," replied Mr. Clark,
who, twenty years younger than Jan Coggan, revolved in the
same orbit.  He secreted mirth on all occasions for special
"Why, Joseph Poorgrass, ye han't had a drop!" said Mr.
Coggan to a self-conscious man in the background, thrusting
"Such a modest man as he is!" said Jacob Smallbury.  "Why,
ye've hardly had strength of eye enough to look in our young
All looked at Joseph Poorgrass with pitying reproach.
"No -- I've hardly looked at her at all," simpered Joseph,
reducing his body smaller whilst talking, apparently from a
meek sense of undue prominence.  "And when I seed her, 'twas
"'Tis a curious nature for a man," said Jan Coggan.
"Yes," continued Joseph Poorgrass -- his shyness, which was
so painful as a defect, filling him with a mild complacency
now that it was regarded as an interesting study.  "'Twere
blush, blush, blush with me every minute of the time, when
"I believe ye, Joseph Poorgrass, for we all know ye to be a
"'Tis a' awkward gift for a man, poor soul," said the
maltster.  "And how long have ye have suffered from it,
[Alternate text: appears in all three additions on hand:
"'Tis a' awkward gift for a man, poor soul," said the
maltster.  "And ye have suffered from it a long time, we
"Oh, ever since I was a boy.  Yes -- mother was concerned to
her heart about it -- yes.  But 'twas all nought."
"Did ye ever go into the world to try and stop it, Joseph
"Oh ay, tried all sorts o' company.  They took me to
Greenhill Fair, and into a great gay jerry-go-nimble show,
where there were women-folk riding round -- standing upon
horses, with hardly anything on but their smocks; but it
didn't cure me a morsel.  And then I was put errand-man at
the Women's Skittle Alley at the back of the Tailor's Arms
in Casterbridge.  'Twas a horrible sinful situation, and a
very curious place for a good man.  I had to stand and look
ba'dy people in the face from morning till night; but 'twas
no use -- I was just as-bad as ever after all.  Blushes hev
been in the family for generations.  There, 'tis a happy
"True," said Jacob Smallbury, deepening his thoughts to a
profounder view of the subject.  "'Tis a thought to look at,
that ye might have been worse; but even as you be, 'tis a
very bad affliction for 'ee, Joseph.  For ye see, shepherd,
though 'tis very well for a woman, dang it all, 'tis awkward
"'Tis -- 'tis," said Gabriel, recovering from a meditation.
"Ay, and he's very timid, too," observed Jan Coggan.  "Once
he had been working late at Yalbury Bottom, and had had a
drap of drink, and lost his way as he was coming home-along
through Yalbury Wood, didn't ye, Master Poorgrass?"
"No, no, no; not that story!" expostulated the modest man,
"---- And so 'a lost himself quite," continued Mr. Coggan,
with an impassive face, implying that a true narrative, like
time and tide, must run its course and would respect no man.
"And as he was coming along in the middle of the night, much
afeared, and not able to find his way out of the trees
nohow, 'a cried out, 'Man-a-lost!  man-a-lost!' A owl in a
tree happened to be crying "Whoo-whoo-whoo!" as owls do, you
know, shepherd" (Gabriel nodded), "and Joseph, all in a
tremble, said, 'Joseph Poorgrass, of Weatherbury, sir!'"
"No, no, now -- that's too much!" said the timid man,
becoming a man of brazen courage all of a sudden.  "I didn't
say sir.  I'll tike my oath I didn't say 'Joseph Poorgrass
o' Weatherbury, sir.' No, no; what's right is right, and I
never said sir to the bird, knowing very well that no man of
a gentleman's rank would be hollering there at that time o'
night. 'Joseph Poorgrass of Weatherbury,' -- that's every
word I said, and I shouldn't ha' said that if 't hadn't been
for Keeper Day's metheglin....  There, 'twas a merciful
The question of which was right being tacitly waived by the
"And he's the fearfullest man, bain't ye, Joseph?  Ay,
another time ye were lost by Lambing-Down Gate, weren't ye,
"I was," replied Poorgrass, as if there were some conditions
too serious even for modesty to remember itself under, this
"Yes; that were the middle of the night, too.  The gate
would not open, try how he would, and knowing there was the
"Ay," said Joseph, acquiring confidence from the warmth of
the fire, the cider, and a perception of the narrative
capabilities of the experience alluded to.  "My heart died
within me, that time; but I kneeled down and said the Lord's
Prayer, and then the Belief right through, and then the Ten
Commandments, in earnest prayer.  But no, the gate wouldn't
open; and then I went on with Dearly Beloved Brethren, and,
thinks I, this makes four, and 'tis all I know out of book,
and if this don't do it nothing will, and I'm a lost man.
Well, when I got to Saying After Me, I rose from my knees
and found the gate would open -- yes, neighbours, the gate
A meditation on the obvious inference was indulged in by
all, and during its continuance each directed his vision
into the ashpit, which glowed like a desert in the tropics
under a vertical sun, shaping their eyes long and liny,
partly because of the light, partly from the depth of the
Gabriel broke the silence.  "What sort of a place is this to
live at, and what sort of a mis'ess is she to work under?"
Gabriel's bosom thrilled gently as he thus slipped under the
notice of the assembly the inner-most subject of his heart.
"We d' know little of her -- nothing.  She only showed
herself a few days ago.  Her uncle was took bad, and the
doctor was called with his world-wide skill; but he couldn't
save the man.  As I take it, she's going to keep on the
"That's about the shape o't, 'a b'lieve," said Jan Coggan.
"Ay, 'tis a very good family. I'd as soon be under 'em as
under one here and there. Her uncle was a very fair sort of
man.  Did ye know en,  shepherd -- a bachelor-man?"
"I used to go to his house a-courting my first wife,
Charlotte, who was his dairymaid.  Well, a very good-hearted
man were Farmer Everdene, and I being a respectable young
fellow was allowed to call and see her and drink as much ale
as I liked, but not to carry away any -- outside my skin I
"And so you see 'twas beautiful ale, and I wished to value
his kindness as much as I could, and not to be so ill-
mannered as to drink only a thimbleful, which would have
"True, Master Coggan, 'twould so," corroborated Mark Clark.
"---- And so I used to eat a lot of salt fish afore going,
and then by the time I got there I were as dry as a lime-
basket -- so thorough dry that that ale would slip down --
ah, 'twould slip down sweet!  Happy times!  heavenly times!
Such lovely drunks as I used to have at that house!  You can
"I can -- I can," said Jacob.  "That one, too, that we had
at Buck's Head on a White Monday was a pretty tipple."
"'Twas.  But for a wet of the better class, that brought you
no nearer to the horned man than you were afore you begun,
there was none like those in Farmer Everdene's kitchen.  Not
a single damn allowed; no, not a bare poor one, even at the
most cheerful moment when all were blindest, though the good
old word of sin thrown in here and there at such times is a
"True," said the maltster.  "Nater requires her swearing at
the regular times, or she's not herself; and unholy
"But Charlotte," continued Coggan -- "not a word of the sort
would Charlotte allow, nor the smallest item of taking in
vain....  Ay, poor Charlotte, I wonder if she had the good
fortune to get into Heaven when 'a died!  But 'a was never
much in luck's way, and perhaps 'a went downwards after all,
"And did any of you know Miss Everdene's father and mother?"
inquired the shepherd, who found some difficulty in keeping
"I knew them a little," said Jacob Smallbury; "but they were
townsfolk, and didn't live here.  They've been dead for
years.  Father, what sort of people were mis'ess' father and
"Well," said the maltster, "he wasn't much to look at; but
she was a lovely woman.  He was fond enough of her as his
"Used to kiss her scores and long-hundreds o' times, so
"He was very proud of her, too, when they were married, as
"Ay," said Coggan.  "He admired her so much that he used to
light the candle three time a night to look at her."
"Boundless love; I shouldn't have supposed it in the
universe!" murmered Joseph Poorgrass, who habitually spoke
"Oh, 'tis true enough.  I knowed the man and woman both
well.  Levi Everdene -- that was the man's name, sure.
"Man," saith I in my hurry, but he were of a higher circle
of life than that -- 'a was a gentleman-tailor really, worth
scores of pounds.  And he became a very celebrated bankrupt
"Oh, I thought he was quite a common man!" said Joseph.
"Oh no, no!  That man failed for heaps of money; hundreds in
The maltster being rather short of breath, Mr. Coggan, after
absently scrutinising a coal which had fallen among the
ashes, took up the narrative, with a private twirl of his
"Well, now, you'd hardly believe it, but that man -- our
Miss Everdene's father -- was one of the ficklest husbands
alive, after a while.  Understand? 'a didn't want to be
fickle, but he couldn't help it.  The pore feller were
faithful and true enough to her in his wish, but his heart
would rove, do what he would.  He spoke to me in real
tribulation about it once.  "Coggan," he said, "I could
never wish for a handsomer woman than I've got, but feeling
she's ticketed as my lawful wife, I can't help my wicked
heart wandering, do what I will."  But at last I believe he
cured it by making her take off her wedding-ring and calling
her by her maiden name as they sat together after the shop
was shut, and so 'a would get to fancy she was only his
sweetheart, and not married to him at all.  And as soon as
he could thoroughly fancy he was doing wrong and committing
the seventh, 'a got to like her as well as ever, and they
"Well, 'twas a most ungodly remedy," murmured Joseph
Poorgrass; "but we ought to feel deep cheerfulness that a
happy Providence kept it from being any worse.  You see, he
might have gone the bad road and given his eyes to
unlawfulness entirely -- yes, gross unlawfulness, so to say
"You see," said Billy Smallbury, "The man's will was to do
right, sure enough, but his heart didn't chime in."
"He got so much better, that he was quite godly in his later
years, wasn't he, Jan?" said Joseph Poorgrass.  "He got
himself confirmed over again in a more serious way, and took
to saying 'Amen' almost as loud as the clerk, and he liked
to copy comforting verses from the tombstones.  He used,
too, to hold the money-plate at Let Your Light so Shine, and
stand godfather to poor little come-by-chance children; and
he kept a missionary box upon his table to nab folks
unawares when they called; yes, and he would box the
charity-boys' ears, if they laughed in church, till they
could hardly stand upright, and do other deeds of piety
"Ay, at that time he thought of nothing but high things,"
added Billy Smallbury.  "One day Parson Thirdly met him and
said, 'Good-Morning, Mister Everdene; 'tis a fine day!'
'Amen' said Everdene, quite absent-like, thinking only of
religion when he seed a parson.  Yes, he was a very
"Their daughter was not at all a pretty chiel at that time,"
said Henery Fray.  "Never should have thought she'd have
"'Tis to be hoped her temper is as good as her face."
"Well, yes; but the baily will have most to do with the
business and ourselves.  Ah!" Henery gazed into the ashpit,
"A queer Christian, like the Devil's head in a cowl,[1] as
[1] This phrase is a conjectural emendation of the
unintelligible expression, "as the Devil said to the Owl,"
"He is," said Henery, implying that irony must cease at a
certain point.  "Between we two, man and man, I believe that
man would as soon tell a lie Sundays as working-days -- that
"True enough," said the man of bitter moods, looking round
upon the company with the antithetic laughter that comes
from a keener appreciation of the miseries of life than
ordinary men are capable of.  'Ah, there's people of one
sort, and people of another, but that man -- bless your
Gabriel thought fit to change the subject.  "You must be a
very aged man, malter, to have sons growed mild and ancient"
"Father's so old that 'a can't mind his age, can ye,
father?" interposed Jacob.  "And he's growed terrible
crooked too, lately," Jacob continued, surveying his
father's figure, which was rather more bowed than his own.
"Really one may say that father there is three-double."
"Crooked folk will last a long while," said the maltster,
"Shepherd would like to hear the pedigree of yer life,
"Ay that I should," said Gabriel with the heartiness of a
man who had longed to hear it for several months.  "What may
The maltster cleared his throat in an exaggerated form for
emphasis, and elongating his gaze to the remotest point of
the ashpit, said, in the slow speech justifiable when the
importance of a subject is so generally felt that any
mannerism must be tolerated in getting at it, "Well, I don't
mind the year I were born in, but perhaps I can reckon up
the places I've lived at, and so get it that way.  I bode at
Upper Longpuddle across there" (nodding to the north) "till
I were eleven.  I bode seven at Kingsbere" (nodding to the
east) "where I took to malting.  I went therefrom to
Norcombe, and malted there two-and-twenty years, and-two-
and-twenty years I was there turnip-hoeing and harvesting.
Ah, I knowed that old place, Norcombe, years afore you were
thought of, Master Oak" (Oak smiled sincere belief in the
fact).  "Then I malted at Durnover four year, and four year
turnip-hoeing; and I was fourteen times eleven months at
Millpond St. Jude's" (nodding north-west-by-north).  "Old
Twills wouldn't hire me for more than eleven months at a
time, to keep me from being chargeable to the parish if so
be I was disabled.  Then I was three year at Mellstock,
and I've been here one-and-thirty year come Candlemas.  How
"Hundred and seventeen," chuckled another old gentleman,
given to mental arithmetic and little conversation, who had
"O no, father!" said Jacob.  "Your turnip-hoeing were in the
summer and your malting in the winter of the same years, and
"Chok' it all!  I lived through the summers, didn't I?  That's
my question.  I suppose ye'll say next I be no age at all to
"Ye be a very old aged person, malter," attested Jan Coggan,
also soothingly. "We all know that, and ye must have a
wonderful talented constitution to be able to live so long,
"True, true; ye must, malter, wonderful," said the meeting
The maltster, being know pacified, was even generous enough
to voluntarily disparage in a slight degree the virtue of
having lived a great many years, by mentioning that the cup
they were drinking out of was three years older than he.
While the cup was being examined, the end of Gabriel Oak's
flute became visible over his smock-frock pocket, and Henery
Fray exclaimed, "Surely, shepherd, I seed you blowing into a
"You did," said Gabriel, blushing faintly.  "I've been in
great trouble, neighbours, and was driven to it.  I used not
"Never mind, heart!" said Mark Clark.  You should take it
careless-like, shepherd, and your time will come.  But we
could thank ye for a tune, if ye bain't too tired?"
"Neither drum nor trumpet have I heard since Christmas,"
said Jan Coggan.  "Come, raise a tune, Master Oak!"
"Ay, that I will," said Gabriel, pulling out his flute and
putting it together.  "A poor tool, neighbours; but such as
Oak then struck up "Jockey to the Fair," and played that
sparkling melody three times through accenting the notes in
the third round in a most artistic and lively manner by
bending his body in small jerks and tapping with his foot to
"He can blow the flute very well -- that 'a can," said a
young married man, who having no individuality worth
mentioning was known as "Susan Tall's husband."  He
continued, "I'd as lief as not be able to blow into a flute
"He's a clever man, and 'tis a true comfort for us to have
such a shepherd," murmured Joseph Poorgrass, in a soft
cadence.  "We ought to feel full o' thanksgiving that he's
not a player of ba'dy songs 'instead of these merry tunes;
for 'twould have been just as easy for God to have made the
shepherd a loose low man -- a man of iniquity, so to speak
it -- as what he is.  Yes, for our wives' and daughters'
"True, true, -- real thanksgiving!" dashed in Mark Clark
conclusively, not feeling it to be of any consequence to his
opinion that he had only heard about a word and three-
"Yes," added Joseph, beginning to feel like a man in the
Bible; "for evil do thrive so in these times that ye may be
as much deceived in the cleanest shaved and whitest shirted
man as in the raggedest tramp upon the turnpike, if I may
"Ay, I can mind yer face now, shepherd," said Henery Fray,
criticising Gabriel with misty eyes as he entered upon his
second tune.  "Yes -- now I see 'ee blowing into the flute I
know 'ee to be the same man I see play at Casterbridge, for
yer mouth were scrimped up and yer eyes a-staring out like a
"'Tis a pity that playing the flute should make a man look
such a scarecrow," observed Mr. Mark Clark, with additional
criticism of Gabriel's countenance, the latter person
jerking out, with the ghastly grimace required by the
"I hope you don't mind that young man's bad manners in
naming your features?" whispered Joseph to Gabriel.
"For by nature ye be a very handsome man, shepherd,"
"Thank you very much," said Oak, in the modest tone good
manners demanded, thinking, however, that he would never let
Bathsheba see him playing the flute; in this resolve showing
a discretion equal to that related to its sagacious
"Ah, when I and my wife were married at Norcombe Church,"
said the old maltster, not pleased at finding himself left
out of the subject "we were called the handsomest couple in
"Danged if ye bain't altered now, malter," said a voice with
the vigour natural to the enunciation of a remarkably
evident truism.  It came from the old man in the background,
whose offensiveness and spiteful ways were barely atoned for
by the occasional chuckle he contributed to general laughs.
"Don't ye play no more shepherd" said Susan Tall's husband,
the young married man who had spoken once before.  "I must
be moving and when there's tunes going on I seem as if hung
in wires.  If I thought after I'd left that music was still
playing, and I not there, I should be quite melancholy-
"What's yer hurry then, Laban?" inquired Coggan.  "You used
"Well, ye see, neighbours, I was lately married to a woman,
and she's my vocation now, and so ye see ----"  The young
"New Lords new laws, as the saying is, I suppose," remarked
"Ay, 'a b'lieve -- ha, ha!" said Susan Tall's husband, in a
tone intended to imply his habitual reception of jokes
without minding them at all.  The young man then wished them
Henery Fray was the first to follow.  Then Gabriel arose and
went off with Jan Coggan, who had offered him a lodging.  A
few minutes later, when the remaining ones were on their
legs and about to depart, Fray came back again in a hurry.
Flourishing his finger ominously he threw a gaze teeming
with tidings just where his eye alighted by accident, which
"O -- what's the matter, what's the matter, Henery?" said
"What's a-brewing, Henrey?" asked Jacob and Mark Clark.
"Baily Pennyways -- Baily Pennyways -- I said so; yes, I
"Stealing it is.  The news is, that after Miss Everdene got
home she went out again to see all was safe, as she usually
do, and coming in found Baily Pennyways creeping down the
granary steps with half a a bushel of barley.  She fleed at
him like a cat -- never such a tomboy as she is -- of course
"She fleed at him, and, to cut a long story short, he owned
to having carried off five sack altogether, upon her
promising not to persecute him.  Well, he's turned out neck
and crop, and my question is, who's going to be baily now?"
The question was such a profound one that Henery was obliged
to drink there and then from the large cup till the bottom
was distinctly visible inside.  Before he had replaced it on
the table, in came the young man, Susan Tall's husband, in a
"No -- not a morsel of it!" they replied, looking into the
very midst of Laban Tall as if to meet his words half-way
"What a night of horrors!" murmured Joseph Poorgrass, waving
his hands spasmodically.  "I've had the news-bell ringing in
my left ear quite bad enough for a murder, and I've seen a
"Fanny Robin -- Miss everdene's youngest servant -- can't be
found.  They've been wanting to lock up the door these two
hours, but she isn't come in.  And they don't know what to
do about going to hed for fear of locking her out.  They
wouldn't be so concerned if she hadn't been noticed in such
low spirits these last few days, and Maryann d' think the
beginning of a crowner's inquest has happened to the poor
"Oh -- 'tis burned -- 'tis burned!" came from Joseph
"Or 'tis her father's razor!" suggested Billy Smallbury,
"Well -- Miss Everdene wants to speak to one or two of us
before we go to bed.  What with this trouble about the
baily, and now about the girl, mis'ess is almost wild."
They all hastened up the lane to the farmhouse, excepting
the old maltster, whom neither news, fire, rain, nor thunder
could draw from his hole.  There, as the others' footsteps
died away he sat down again and continued gazing as usual
From the bedroom window above their heads Bathsheba's head
and shoulders, robed in mystic white, were dimly seen
"Are any of my men among you?" she said anxiously.
"To-morrow morning I wish two or three of you to make
inquiries in the villages round if they have seen such a
person as Fanny Robin.  Do it quietly; there is no reason
for alarm as yet.  She must have left whilst we were all at
"I beg yer pardon, but had she any young man courting her in
"I've never heard of any such thing, ma'am," said two or
"It is hardly likely, either," continued Bathsheba.  "For
any lover of hers might have come to the house if he had
been a respectable lad.  The most mysterious matter
connected with her absence -- indeed, the only thing which
gives me serious alarm -- is that she was seen to go out of
the house by Maryann with only her indoor working gown on --
"And you mean, ma'am, excusing my words, that a young woman
would hardly go to see her young man without dressing up,"
said Jacob, turning his mental vision upon past experiences.
"She had, I think, a bundle, though I couldn't see very
well," said a female voice from another window, which seemed
that of Maryann.  "But she had no young man about here.
Hers lives in Casterbridge, and I believe he's a soldier."
"Very well; if she doesn't return tomorrow, mind you go
there and try to discover which man it is, and see him.  I
feel more responsible than I should if she had had any
friends or relations alive.  I do hope she has come to no
harm through a man of that kind....  And then there's this
disgraceful affair of the bailiff -- but I can't speak of
Bathsheba had so many reasons for uneasiness that it seemed
she did not think it worth while to dwell upon any
particular one.  "Do as I told you, then," she said in
"Ay, ay, mistress; we will," they replied, and moved away.
That night at Coggan's, Gabriel Oak, beneath the screen of
closed eyelids, was busy with fancies, and full of movement,
like a river flowing rapidly under its ice.  Night had
always been the time at which he saw Bathsheba most vividly,
and through the slow hours of shadow he tenderly regarded
her image now.  It is rarely that the pleasures of the
imagination will compensate for the pain of sleeplessness,
but they possibly did with Oak to-night, for the delight of
merely seeing her effaced for the time his perception of the
He also thought of plans for fetching his few utensils and
books from Norcombe.  THE YOUNG MAN'S BEST COMPANION, THE
FARRIER'S SURE GUIDE, THE VETERINARY SURGEON, PARADISE LOST,
THE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS, ROBINSON CRUSOE, ASH'S DICTIONARY,
the Walkingame's ARITHMETIC, constituted his library; and
though a limited series, it was one from which he had
acquired more sound information by diligent perusal than
many a man of opportunities has done from a furlong of laden
BY daylight, the Bower of Oak's new-found mistress,
Bathsheba Everdene, presented itself as a hoary building, of
the early stage of Classic Renaissance as regards its
architecture, and of a proportion which told at a glance
that, as is so frequently the case, it had once been the
memorial hall upon a small estate around it, now altogether
effaced as a distinct property, and merged in the vast tract
of a non-resident landlord, which comprised several such
Fluted pilasters, worked from the solid stone, decorated its
front, and above the roof the chimneys were panelled or
columnar, some coped gables with finials and like features
still retaining traces of their Gothic extraction.  Soft
brown mosses, like faded velveteen, formed cushions upon the
stone tiling, and tufts of the houseleek or sengreen
sprouted from the eaves of the low surrounding buildings.  A
gravel walk leading from the door to the road in front was
encrusted at the sides with more moss -- here it was a
silver-green variety, the nut-brown of the gravel being
visible to the width of only a foot or two in the centre.
This circumstance, and the generally sleepy air of the whole
prospect here, together with the animated and contrasting
state of the reverse facade, suggested to the imagination
that on the adaptation of the building for farming purposes
the vital principle of the house had turned round inside its
body to face the other way.  Reversals of this kind, strange
deformities, tremendous paralyses, are often seen to be
inflicted by trade upon edifices -- either individual or in
the aggregate as streets and towns -- which were originally
Lively voices were heard this morning in the upper rooms,
the main staircase to which was of hard oak, the balusters,
heavy as bed-posts, being turned and moulded in the quaint
fashion of their century, the handrail as stout as a
parapet-top, and the stairs themselves continually twisting
round like a person trying to look over his shoulder.  Going
up, the floors above were found to have a very irregular
surface, rising to ridges, sinking into valleys; and being
just then uncarpeted, the face of the boards was seen to be
eaten into innumerable vermiculations. Every window replied
by a clang to the opening and shutting of every door, a
tremble followed every bustling movement, and a creak
accompanied a walker about the house, like a spirit,
In the room from which the conversation proceeded Bathsheba
and her servant-companion, Liddy Smallbury were to be
complication of papers, books, bottles, and rubbish spread
out thereon -- remnants from the household stores of the
late occupier.  Liddy, the maltster's great-granddaughter,
was about Bathsheba's equal in age, and her face was a
prominent advertisement of the light-hearted English country
girl. The beauty her features might have lacked in form was
amply made up for by perfection of hue, which at this
winter-time was the softened ruddiness on a surface of high
rotundity that we meet with in a Terburg or a Gerard Douw;
and, like the presentations of those great colourists, it
was a face which kept well back from the boundary between
comeliness and the ideal.  Though elastic in nature she was
less daring than Bathsheba, and occasionally showed some
earnestness, which consisted half of genuine feeling, and
Through a partly-opened door the noise of a scrubbing-brush
led up to the charwoman, Maryann Money, a person who for a
face had a circular disc, furrowed less by age than by long
gazes of perplexity at distant objects.  To think of her was
to get good-humoured; to speak of her was to raise the image
"Stop your scrubbing a moment," said Bathsheba through the
The tramp of a horse was apparent, approaching the front of
the building.  The paces slackened, turned in at the wicket,
and, what was most unusual, came up the mossy path close to
the door.  The door was tapped with the end of a crop or
"What impertinence!"  said Liddy, in a low voice.  "To ride
up the footpath like that!  Why didn't he stop at the gate?
Lord!  'Tis a gentleman!  I see the top of his hat."
The further expression of Liddy's concern was continued by
"Why doesn't Mrs. Coggan go to the door?"  Bath-sheba
Rat-tat-tat-tat resounded more decisively from Bath-sheba's
"Maryann, you go!"  said she, fluttering under the onset of
The argument was unanswerable after a glance at Maryann.
Liddy held up her hands and arms, coated with dust from the
rubbish they were sorting, and looked imploringly at her
"There -- Mrs. Coggan is going!" said Bathsheba, exhaling
her relief in the form of a long breath which had lain in
"I'll see, sir," said Mrs. Coggan, and in a minute appeared
"Dear, what a thirtover place this world is!" continued Mrs.
Coggan (a wholesome-looking lady who had a voice for each
class of remark according to the emotion involved; who could
toss a pancake or twirl a mop with the accuracy of pure
mathematics, and who at this moment showed hands shaggy with
fragments of dough and arms encrusted with flour).  "I am
never up to my elbows, Miss, in making a pudding but one of
two things do happen -- either my nose must needs begin
tickling, and I can't live without scratching it, or
somebody knocks at the door. Here's Mr. Boldwood wanting to
A woman's dress being a part of her countenance, and any
disorder in the one being of the same nature with a
malformation or wound in the other, Bathsheba said at once -
"I can't see him in this state.  Whatever shall I do?"
Not-at-homes were hardly naturalized in Weatherbury
farmhouses, so Liddy suggested -- "Say you're a fright with
Mrs. Coggan went downstairs, and returned the answer as
requested, adding, however, on her own responsibility, "Miss
is dusting bottles, sir, and is quite a object -- that's why
"Oh, very well," said the deep voice indifferently.  "All I
wanted to ask was, if anything had been heard of Fanny
"Nothing, sir -- but we may know to-night.  William
Smallbury is gone to Casterbridge, where her young man
lives, as is supposed, and the other men be inquiring about
The horse's tramp then recommenced and retreated, and the
"Forty, I should say -- very handsome -- rather stern-
"What a bother this dusting is!  I am always in some
unfortunate plight or other," Bathsheba said, complainingly.
"Oh, because, as she had no friends in her childhood, he
took her and put her to school, and got her her place here
under your uncle.  He's a very kind man that way, but Lord --
"Never was such a hopeless man for a woman!  He's been
courted by sixes and sevens -- all the girls, gentle and
simple, for miles round, have tried him.  Jane Perkins
worked at him for two months like a slave, and the two Miss
Taylors spent a year upon him, and he cost Farmer Ives's
daughter nights of tears and twenty pounds' worth of new
clothes; but Lord -- the money might as well have been
A little boy came up at this moment and looked in upon them.
This child was one of the Coggans, who, with the Smallburys,
were as common among the families of this district as the
Avons and Derwents among our rivers.  He always had a
loosened tooth or a cut finger to show to particular
friends, which he did with an air of being thereby elevated
above the common herd of afflictionless humanity -- to which
exhibition people were expected to say "Poor child!" with a
"I've got a pen-nee!" said Master Coggan in a scanning
"Mis-terr Bold-wood!  He gave it to me for opening the gate."
"He said, 'Where are you going, my little man?' and I said,
'To Miss Everdene's please,' and he said, 'She is a staid
woman, isn't she, my little man?' and I said, 'Yes.'"
discontentedly when the child had gone.  "Get away, Maryann,
or go on with your scrubbing, or do something!  You ought to
be married by this time, and not here troubling me!"
"Ay, mistress -- so I did.  But what between the poor men I
won't have, and the rich men who won't have me, I stand as a
"Did anybody ever want to marry you miss?" Liddy ventured to
ask when they were again alone.  "Lots of 'em, I daresay?"
Bathsheba paused, as if about to refuse a reply, but the
temptation to say yes, since it was really in her power was
irresistible by aspiring virginity, in spite of her spleen
"A man wanted to once," she said, in a highly experienced
tone and the image of Gabriel Oak, as the farmer, rose
"How nice it must seem!" said Liddy, with the fixed features
of mental realization.  "And you wouldn't have him?"
"How sweet to be able to disdain, when most of us are glad
to say, 'Thank you!' I seem I hear it.  'No, sir -- I'm your
better.' or 'Kiss my foot, sir; my face is for mouths of
"Of course not -- what footsteps are those I hear?"
Liddy looked from a back window into the courtyard behind,
which was now getting low-toned and dim with the earliest
films of night.  A crooked file of men was approaching the
back door.  The whole string of trailing individuals
advanced in the completest balance of intention, like the
remarkable creatures known as Chain Salpae, which,
distinctly organized in other respects, have one will common
to a whole family.  Some were, as usual, in snow-white
smock-frocks of Russia duck, and some in whitey-brown ones
of drabbet -- marked on the wrists, breasts, backs, and
sleeves with honeycomb-work.  Two or three women in pattens
"The Philistines be upon us," said Liddy, making her nose
"Oh, very well.  Maryann, go down and keep them in the
kitchen till I am dressed, and then show them in to me in
HALF-AN-HOUR later Bathsheba, in finished dress, and
followed by Liddy, entered the upper end of the old hall to
find that her men had all deposited themselves on a long
form and a settle at the lower extremity.  She sat down at a
table and opened the time-book, pen in her hand, with a
canvas money-bag beside her.  From this she poured a small
heap of coin.  Liddy chose a position at her elbow and began
to sew, sometimes pausing and looking round, or with the air
of a privileged person, taking up one of the half-sovereigns
lying before her and surveying it merely as a work of art,
while strictly preventing her countenance from expressing
"Now before I begin, men," said Bathsheba, "I have two
matters to speak of.  The first is that the bailiff is
dismissed for thieving, and that I have formed a resolution
to have no bailiff at all, but to manage everything with my
"The next matter is, have you heard anything of Fanny?"
"I met Farmer Boldwood," said Jacob Smallbury, "and I went
with him and two of his men, and dragged Newmill Pond, but
"And the new shepherd have been to Buck's Head, by Yalbury,
thinking she had gone there, but nobody had seed her," said
"Yes, ma'am, but he's not yet come home.  He promised to be
"It wants a quarter to six at present," said Bathsheba,
looking at her watch.  "I daresay he'll be in directly.
Well, now then" -- she looked into the book -- "Joseph
"Yes, sir -- ma'am I mane," said the person addressed.  "I
"Nothing in my own eye.  In the eye of other people -- well,
"I do do carting things all the year, and in seed time I
shoots the rooks and sparrows, and helps at pig-killing,
"Please nine and ninepence and a good halfpenny where 'twas
"Quite correct.  Now here are ten shillings in addition as a
Bathsheba blushed slightly at the sense of being generous in
public, and Henery Fray, who had drawn up towards her chair,
lifted his eyebrows and fingers to express amazement on a
"How much do I owe you -- that man in the corner -- what's
"Matthew Moon, ma'am," said a singular framework of clothes
with nothing of any consequence inside them, which advanced
with the toes in no definite direction forwards, but turned
"Matthew Mark, did you say? -- speak out -- I shall not hurt
"Matthew Moon, mem," said Henery Fray, correctingly, from
behind her chair, to which point he had edged himself.
"Matthew Moon," murmured Bathsheba, turning her bright eyes
to the book.  "Ten and twopence halfpenny is the sum put
"Yes, mis'ess," said Matthew, as the rustle of wind among
"Here it is, and ten shillings.  Now the next -- Andrew
Randle, you are a new man, I hear.  How come you to leave
"P-p-p-p-p-pl-pl-pl-pl-l-l-l-l-ease, ma'am, p-p-p-p-pl-pl-
"'A's a stammering man, mem," said Henery Fray in an
undertone, "and they turned him away because the only time
he ever did speak plain he said his soul was his own, and
other iniquities, to the squire.  'A can cuss, mem, as well
as you or I, but 'a can't speak a common speech to save his
"Andrew Randle, here's yours -- finish thanking me in a day
or two.  Temperance Miller -- oh, here's another, Soberness
"Yes'm.  Here we be, 'a b'lieve," was echoed in shrill
"Tending thrashing-machine and wimbling haybonds, and saying
'Hoosh!' to the cocks and hens when they go upon your seeds
and planting Early Flourballs and Thompson's Wonderfuls with
"Yes -- I see.  Are they satisfactory women?" she inquired
"Oh mem -- don't ask me!  Yielding women -- as scarlet a pair
Joseph Poorgrass, in the background twitched, and his lips
became dry with fear of some terrible consequences, as he
saw Bathsheba summarily speaking, and Henery slinking off to
"Now the next.  Laban Tall, you'll stay on working for me?"
"For you or anybody that pays me well, ma'am," replied the
"True -- the man must live!" said a woman in the back
quarter, who had just entered with clicking pattens.
"I be his lawful wife!" continued the voice with greater
prominence of manner and tone.  This lady called herself
five-and-twenty, looked thirty, passed as thirty-five, and
was forty.  She was a woman who never, like some newly
married, showed conjugal tenderness in public, perhaps
"Oh, you are," said Bathsheba.  "Well, Laban, will you stay
"Yes, he'll stay, ma'am!" said again the shrill tongue of
"Oh Lord, not he, ma'am!  A simple tool.  Well enough, but a
"Heh-heh-heh!" laughed the married man with a hideous effort
of appreciation, for he was as irrepressibly good-humoured
under ghastly snubs as a parliamentary candidate on the
The names remaining were called in the same manner.
"Now I think I have done with you," said Bathsheba, closing
the book and shaking back a stray twine of hair.  "Has
"The new shepherd will want a man under him," suggested
Henery Fray, trying to make himself official again by a
"Young Cain Ball is a very good lad," Henery said, "and
Shepherd Oak don't mind his youth?" he added, turning with
an apologetic smile to the shepherd, who had just appeared
on the scene, and was now leaning against the doorpost with
"How did Cain come by such a name?" asked Bathsheba.
"Oh you see, mem, his pore mother, not being a Scripture-
read woman, made a mistake at his christening, thinking
'twas Abel killed Cain, and called en Cain, but 'twas too
late, for the name could never be got rid of in the parish.
"Yes.  However, we soften it down as much as we can, and
call him Cainy.  Ah, pore widow-woman! she cried her heart
out about it almost.  She was brought up by a very heathen
father and mother, who never sent her to church or school,
and it shows how the sins of the parents are visited upon
Mr. Fray here drew up his features to the mild degree of
melancholy required when the persons involved in the given
"Very well then, Cainey Ball to be under-shepherd. And you
quite understand your duties? -- you I mean, Gabriel Oak?"
"Quite well, I thank you, Miss Everdene," said Shepard Oak
from the doorpost.  "If I don't, I'll inquire." Gabriel was
rather staggered by the remarkable coolness of her manner.
Certainly nobody without previous information would have
dreamt that Oak and the handsome woman before whom he stood
had ever been other than strangers.  But perhaps her air was
the inevitable result of the social rise which had advanced
her from a cottage to a large house and fields.  The case is
not unexampled in high places.  When, in the writings of the
later poets, Jove and his family are found to have moved
from their cramped quarters on the peak of Olympus into the
wide sky above it, their words show a proportionate increase
Footsteps were heard in the passage, combining in their
character the qualities both of weight and measure, rather
(All.) "Here's Billy Smallbury come from Casterbridge."
"And what's the news?" said Bathsheba, as William, after
marching to the middle of the hall, took a handkerchief from
his hat and wiped his forehead from its centre to its
"I should have been sooner, miss," he said, "if it hadn't
been for the weather."  He then stamped with each foot
severely, and on looking down his boots were perceived to be
"Well, ma'am, in round numbers, she's run away with the
"I'll tell ye all particulars.  When I got to Casterbridge
Barracks, they said, 'The Eleventh Dragoon-Guards be gone
away, and new troops have come.' The Eleventh left last week
for Melchester and onwards.  The Route came from Government
like a thief in the night, as is his nature to, and afore
the Eleventh knew it almost, they were on the march.  They
Gabriel had listened with interest.  "I saw them go," he
"Yes," continued William, "they pranced down the street
playing 'The Girl I Left Behind Me,' so 'tis said, in
glorious notes of triumph.  Every looker-on's inside shook
with the blows of the great drum to his deepest vitals, and
there was not a dry eye throughout the town among the
"No, ma'am; but they be gone to take the places of them who
may, which is very close connected.  And so I said to
myself, Fanny's young man was one of the regiment, and she's
gone after him.  There, ma'am, that's it in black and
"No; nobody knew it.  I believe he was higher in rank than a
Gabriel remained musing and said nothing, for he was in
"Well, we are not likely to know more to-night, at any
rate," said Bathsheba.  "But one of you had better run
across to Farmer Boldwood's and tell him that much."
She then rose; but before retiring, addressed a few words to
them with a pretty dignity, to which her mourning dress
added a soberness that was hardly to be found in the words
"Now mind, you have a mistress instead of a master. I don't
yet know my powers or my talents in farming; but I shall do
my best, and if you serve me well, so shall I serve you.
Don't any unfair ones among you (if there are any such, but
I hope not) suppose that because I'm a woman I don't
understand the difference between bad goings-on and good."
"I shall be up before you are awake; I shall be afield
before you are up; and I shall have breakfasted before you
Then this small thesmothete stepped from the table, and
surged out of the hall, her black silk dress licking up a
few straws and dragging them along with a scratching noise
upon the floor.  Liddy, elevating her feelings to the
occasion from a sense of grandeur, floated off behind
Bathsheba with a milder dignity not entirely free from
FOR dreariness nothing could surpass a prospect in the
outskirts of a certain town and military station, many miles
north of Weatherbury, at a later hour on this same snowy
evening -- if that may be called a prospect of which the
It was a night when sorrow may come to the brightest without
causing any great sense of incongruity: when, with
impressible persons, love becomes solicitousness, hope sinks
to misgiving, and faith to hope:  when the exercise of
memory does not stir feelings of regret at opportunities for
ambition that have been passed by, and anticipation does not
The scene was a public path, bordered on the left hand by a
river, behind which rose a high wall.  On the right was a
tract of land, partly meadow and partly moor, reaching, at
The changes of the seasons are less obtrusive on spots of
this kind than amid woodland scenery.  Still, to a close
observer, they are just as perceptible; the difference is
that their media of manifestation are less trite and
familiar than such well-known ones as the bursting of the
buds or the fall of the leaf.  Many are not so stealthy and
gradual as we may be apt to imagine in considering the
general torpidity of a moor or waste.  Winter, in coming to
the country hereabout, advanced in well-marked stages,
wherein might have been successively observed the retreat of
the snakes, the transformation of the ferns, the filling of
the pools, a rising of fogs, the embrowning by frost, the
collapse of the fungi, and an obliteration by snow.
This climax of the series had been reached to-night on the
aforesaid moor, and for the first time in the season its
irregularities were forms without features; suggestive of
anything, proclaiming nothing, and without more character
than that of being the limit of something else -- the lowest
layer of a firmament of snow.  From this chaotic skyful of
crowding flakes the mead and moor momentarily received
additional clothing, only to appear momentarily more naked
thereby.  The vast arch of cloud above was strangely low,
and formed as it were the roof of a large dark cavern,
gradually sinking in upon its floor; for the instinctive
thought was that the snow lining the heavens and that
encrusting the earth would soon unite into one mass without
We turn our attention to the left-hand characteristics;
which were flatness in respect of the river, verticality in
respect of the wall behind it, and darkness as to both.
These features made up the mass.  If anything could be
darker than the sky, it was the wall, and if any thing could
be gloomier than the wall it was the river beneath.  The
indistinct summit of the facade was notched and pronged by
chimneys here and there, and upon its face were faintly
signified the oblong shapes of windows, though only in the
upper part.  Below, down to the water's edge, the flat was
An indescribable succession of dull blows, perplexing in
their regularity, sent their sound with difficulty through
the fluffy atmosphere.  It was a neighbouring clock striking
ten. The bell was in the open air, and being overlaid with
several inches of muffling snow, had lost its voice for the
About this hour the snow abated:  ten flakes fell where
twenty had fallen, then one had the room of ten.  Not long
By its outline upon the colourless background, a close
observer might have seen that it was small.  This was all
that was positively discoverable, though it seemed human.
The shape went slowly along, but without much exertion, for
the snow, though sudden, was not as yet more than two inches
deep.  At this time some words were spoken aloud: --
Between each utterance the little shape advanced about half
a dozen yards.  It was evident now that the windows high in
the wall were being counted.  The word "Five" represented
Here the spot stopped, and dwindled smaller.  The figure was
stooping.  Then a morsel of snow flew across the river
towards the fifth window.  It smacked against the wall at a
point several yards from its mark.  The throw was the idea
of a man conjoined with the execution of a woman.  No man
who had ever seen bird, rabbit, or squirrel in his
childhood, could possibly have thrown with such utter
Another attempt, and another; till by degrees the wall must
have become pimpled with the adhering lumps of snow At last
The river would have been seen by day to be of that deep
smooth sort which races middle and sides with the same
gliding precision, any irregularities of speed being
immediately corrected by a small whirlpool.  Nothing was
heard in reply to the signal but the gurgle and cluck of one
of these invisible wheels -- together with a few small
sounds which a sad man would have called moans, and a happy
man laughter -- caused by the flapping of the waters against
Then a noise was heard, apparently produced by the opening
of the window.  This was followed by a voice from the same
The tones were masculine, and not those of surprise.  The
high wall being that of a barrack, and marriage being looked
communications had probably been made across the river
"Is it Sergeant Troy?" said the blurred spot in the snow,
This person was so much like a mere shade upon the earth,
and the other speaker so much a part of the building, that
one would have said the wall was holding a conversation with
"Yes," came suspiciously from the shadow. "What girl are
"Oh, Frank -- don't you know me?" said the spot.  "Your
"Yes," said the girl, with a half-suppressed gasp of
There was something in the woman's tone which is not that of
the wife, and there was a manner in the man which is rarely
"I did not expect you to-night.  Indeed, I did not think you
would come at all.  It was a wonder you found me here.  I am
"Yes, I mean that I might.  You are glad to see me, Frank?"
My dear Fan, no!  The bugle has sounded, the barrack gates
are closed, and I have no leave.  We are all of us as good
"Then I shan't see you till then!"  The words were in a
"I walked -- some part of the way -- the rest by the
"O you do!  Don't speak like that.  It weighs me to the
earth.  It makes me say what ought to be said first by you."
"O, must I? -- it is, when shall we be married, Frank?"
"Oh, I see.  Well -- you have to get proper clothes."
"My lodgings are in St. Mary's, and this is not.  So they
"Yes.  O Frank -- you think me forward, I am afraid!  Don't,
dear Frank -- will you -- for I love you so.  And you said
lots of times you would marry me, and and -- I -- I -- I ---
"Don't cry, now!  It is foolish.  If I said so, of course I
"And shall I put up the banns in my parish, and will you in
"O -- how is it?  You said you almost had before you left
"The fact is, I forgot to ask.  Your coming like this is so
"Yes -- yes -- it is.  It was wrong of me to worry you.
I'll go away now.  Will you come and see me to-morrow, at
Mrs. Twills's, in North Street?  I don't like to come to the
Barracks.  There are bad women about, and they think me
"Quite, so.  I'll come to you, my dear.  Good-night."
And the noise was again heard of a window closing.  The
little spot moved away.  When she passed the corner a
"Ho -- ho -- Sergeant -- ho -- ho!" An  expostulation
followed, but it was indistinct; and it became lost amid a
low peal of laughter, which was hardly distinguishable from
THE first public evidence of Bathsheba's decision to be a
farmer in her own person and by proxy no more was her
appearance the following market-day in the cornmarket at
The low though extensive hall, supported by beams and
pillars, and latterly dignified by the name of Corn
Exchange, was thronged with hot men who talked among each
other in twos and threes, the speaker of the minute looking
sideways into his auditor's face and concentrating his
argument by a contraction of one eyelid during delivery.
The greater number carried in their hands ground-ash
saplings, using them partly as walking-sticks and partly for
poking up pigs, sheep, neighbours with their backs turned,
and restful things in general, which seemed to require such
treatment in the course of their peregrinations.  During
conversations each subjected his sapling to great varieties
of usage -- bending it round his back, forming an arch of it
between his two hands, overweighting it on the ground till
it reached nearly a semicircle; or perhaps it was hastily
tucked under the arm whilst the sample-bag was pulled forth
and a handful of corn poured into the palm, which, after
criticism, was flung upon the floor, an issue of events
perfectly well known to half-a-dozen acute town-bred fowls
which had as usual crept into the building unobserved, and
waited the fulfilment of their anticipations with a high-
Among these heavy yeomen a feminine figure glided, the
single one of her sex that the room contained.  She was
prettily and even daintily dressed.  She moved between them
as a chaise between carts, was heard after them as a romance
after sermons, was felt among them like a breeze among
furnaces.  It had required a little determination -- far
more than she had at first imagined -- to take up a position
here, for at her first entry the lumbering dialogues had
ceased, nearly every face had been turned towards her, and
those that were already turned rigidly fixed there.
Two or three only of the farmers were personally known to
Bathsheba, and to these she had made her way.  But if she
was to be the practical woman she had intended to show
herself, business must be carried on, introductions or none,
and she ultimately acquired confidence enough to speak and
reply boldly to men merely known to her by hearsay.
Bathsheba too had her sample-bags, and by degrees adopted
the professional pour into the hand -- holding up the grains
in her narrow palm for inspection, in perfect Casterbridge
Something in the exact arch of her upper unbroken row of
teeth, and in the keenly pointed corners of her red mouth
when, with parted lips, she somewhat defiantly turned up her
face to argue a point with a tall man, suggested that there
was potentiality enough in that lithe slip of humanity for
alarming exploits of sex, and daring enough to carry them
out.  But her eyes had a softness -- invariably a softness --
mistiness; as they were, it lowered an expression that might
Strange to say of a woman in full bloom and vigor, she
always allowed her interlocutors to finish their statements
before rejoining with hers.  In arguing on prices, she held
to her own firmly, as was natural in a dealer, and reduced
theirs persistently, as was inevitable in a woman.  But
there was an elasticity in her firmness which removed it
from obstinacy, as there was a naivete in her cheapening
Those of the farmers with whom she had no dealings by far
the greater part) were continually asking each other, "Who
"Farmer Everdene's niece; took on Weatherbury Upper Farm;
turned away the baily, and swears she'll do everything
"Yes, 'tis a pity she's so headstrong," the first would say.
"But we ought to be proud of her here -- she lightens up the
old place.  'Tis such a shapely maid, however, that she'll
It would be ungallant to suggest that the novelty of her
engagement in such an occupation had almost as much to do
with the magnetism as had the beauty of her face and
movements.  However, the interest was general, and this
Saturday's DEBUT in the forum, whatever it may have been to
unquestionably a triumph to her as the maiden.  Indeed, the
sensation was so pronounced that her instinct on two or
three occasions was merely to walk as a queen among these
gods of the fallow, like a little sister of a little Jove,
The numerous evidences of her power to attract were only
thrown into greater relief by a marked exception.  Women
seem to have eyes in their ribbons for such matters as
these.  Bathsheba, without looking within a right angle of
him, was conscious of a black sheep among the flock.
It perplexed her first.  If there had been a respectable
minority on either side, the case would have been most
natural.  If nobody had regarded her, she would have --
taken the matter indifferently -- such cases had occurred.
If everybody, this man included, she would have taken it as
a matter of course -- people had done so before.  But the
She soon knew thus much of the recusant's appearance.  He
was a gentlemanly man, with full and distinctly outlined
Roman features, the prominences of which glowed in the sun
with a bronze-like richness of tone.  He was erect in
attitude, and quiet in demeanour.  One characteristic pre-
Apparently he had some time ago reached that entrance to
middle age at which a man's aspect naturally ceases to alter
for the term of a dozen years or so; and, artificially, a
woman's does likewise.  Thirty-five and fifty were his
limits of variation -- he might have been either, or
It may be said that married men of forty are usually ready
and generous enough to fling passing glances at any specimen
of moderate beauty they may discern by the way.  Probably,
as with persons playing whist for love, the consciousness of
a certain immunity under any circumstances from that worst
possible ultimate, the having to pay, makes them unduly
speculative.  Bathsheba was convinced that this unmoved
When marketing was over, she rushed off to Liddy, who was
waiting for her -- beside the yellowing in which they had
driven to town.  The horse was put in, and on they trotted
Bathsheba's sugar, tea, and drapery parcels being packed
behind, and expressing in some indescribable manner, by
their colour, shape, and general lineaments, that they were
that young lady-farmer's property, and the grocer's and
"I've been through it, Liddy, and it is over.  I shan't mind
it again, for they will all have grown accustomed to seeing
me there; but this morning it was as bad as being married --
"I knowed it would be," Liddy said.  "Men be such a terrible
"But there was one man who had more sense than to waste his
time upon me." The information was put in this form that
Liddy might not for a moment suppose her mistress was at all
piqued.  "A very good-looking man," she continued, "upright;
about forty, I should think.  Do you know at all who he
"Can't you guess at all?" said Bathsheba with some
"I haven't a notion; besides, 'tis no difference, since he
took less notice of you than any of the rest.  Now, if he'd
Bathsheba was suffering from the reverse feeling just then,
and they bowled along in silence.  A low carriage, bowling
along still more rapidly behind a horse of unimpeachable
Liddy looked.  "That!  That's Farmer Boldwood -- of course
'tis -- the man you couldn't see the other day when he
"Oh, Farmer Boldwood," murmured Bathsheba, and looked at him
as he outstripped them.  The farmer had never turned his
head once, but with eyes fixed on the most advanced point
along the road, passed as unconsciously and abstractedly as
"He's an interesting man -- don't you think so?" she
"I wonder why he is so wrapt up and indifferent, and
seemingly so far away from all he sees around him."
"It is said -- but not known for certain -- that he met with
some bitter disappointment when he was a young man and
"People always say that -- and we know very well women
scarcely ever jilt men; 'tis the men who jilt us.  I expect
"Simply his nature -- I expect so, miss -- nothing else in
"Still, 'tis more romantic to think he has been served
cruelly, poor thing'!  Perhaps, after all, he has!"
"Depend upon it he has.  Oh yes, miss, he has!  I feel he
"However, we are very apt to think extremes of people.  I --
shouldn't wonder after all if it wasn't a little of both --
just between the two -- rather cruelly used and rather
"Oh dear no, miss -- I can't think it between the two!"
"Well, yes, so it is.  I am convinced it is most likely.
You may -- take my word, miss, that that's what's the matter
IT was Sunday afternoon in the farmhouse, on the thirteenth
of February.  Dinner being over, Bathsheba, for want of a
better companion, had asked Liddy to come and sit with her.
The mouldy pile was dreary in winter-time before the candles
were lighted and the shutters closed; the atmosphere of the
place seemed as old as the walls; every nook behind the
furniture had a temperature of its own, for the fire was not
kindled in this part of the house early in the day; and
Bathsheba's new piano, which was an old one in other annals,
looked particularly sloping and out of level on the warped
floor before night threw a shade over its less prominent
angles and hid the unpleasantness.  Liddy, like a little
brook, though shallow, was always rippling; her presence had
not so much weight as to task thought, and yet enough to
On the table lay an old quarto Bible, bound in leather.
"Did you ever find out, miss, who you are going to marry by
"Don't be so foolish, Liddy.  As if such things could be."
"And it makes your heart beat fearful.  Some believe in it;
"Very well, let's try it," said Bathsheba, bounding from her
seat with that total disregard of consistency which can be
indulged in towards a dependent, and entering into the
spirit of divination at once.  "Go and get the front door
Liddy fetched it.  "I wish it wasn't Sunday," she said, on
"What's right week days is right Sundays," replied her
The book was opened -- the leaves, drab with age, being
quite worn away at much-read verses by the forefingers of
unpractised readers in former days, where they were moved
along under the line as an aid to the vision.  The special
verse in the Book of Ruth was sought out by Bathsheba, and
the sublime words met her eye.  They slightly thrilled and
abashed her.  It was Wisdom in the abstract facing Folly in
the concrete.  Folly in the concrete blushed, persisted in
her intention, and placed the key on the book.  A rusty
patch immediately upon the verse, caused by previous
pressure of an iron substance thereon, told that this was
not the first time the old volume had been used for the
The verse was repeated; the book turned round; Bathsheba
"Did you notice Mr. Boldwood's doings in church this
morning, miss?" Liddy continued, adumbrating by the remark
"No, indeed," said Bathsheba, with serene indifference.
Liddy assumed a smaller physiognomy, and shut her lips
This move was unexpected, and proportionately disconcerting.
"Didn't turn his head to look at you once all the service.
"Why should he?" again demanded her mistress, wearing a
"Oh no.  But everybody else was noticing you; and it was odd
he didn't.  There, 'tis like him.  Rich and gentlemanly,
Bathsheba dropped into a silence intended to express that
she had opinions on the matter too abstruse for Liddy's
comprehension, rather than that she had nothing to say.
"Dear me -- I had nearly forgotten the valentine I bought
"Valentine! who for, miss?" said Liddy.  "Farmer Boldwood?"
It was the single name among all possible wrong ones that
just at this moment seemed to Bathsheba more pertinent than
"Well, no.  It is only for little Teddy Coggan.  I have
promised him something, and this will be a pretty surprise
for him.  Liddy, you may as well bring me my desk and I'll
Bathsheba took from her desk a gorgeously illuminated and
embossed design in post-octavo, which had been bought on the
Casterbridge.  In the centre was a small oval enclosure;
this was left blank, that the sender might insert tender
words more appropriate to the special occasion than any
"Here's a place for writing," said Bathsheba.  "What shall I
"Something of this sort, I should think', returned Liddy
"Yes, that shall be it.  It just suits itself to a chubby-
faced child like him," said Bathsheba.  She inserted the
words in a small though legible handwriting; enclosed the
sheet in an envelope, and dipped her pen for the direction.
"What fun it would be to send it to the stupid old Boldwood,
and how he would wonder!" said the irrepressible Liddy,
lifting her eyebrows, and indulging in an awful mirth on the
verge of fear as she thought of the moral and social
Bathsheba paused to regard the idea at full length.
Boldwood's had begun to be a troublesome image -- a species
of Daniel in her kingdom who persisted in kneeling eastward
when reason and common sense said that he might just as well
follow suit with the rest, and afford her the official
glance of admiration which cost nothing at all.  She was far
from being seriously concerned about his nonconformity.
Still, it was faintly depressing that the most dignified and
valuable man in the parish should withhold his eyes, and
that a girl like Liddy should talk about it.  So Liddy's
"No, I won't do that.  He wouldn't see any humour in it."
"Really, I don't care particularly to send it to Teddy,"
remarked her mistress.  "He's rather a naughty child
"Let's toss as men do," said Bathsheba, idly.  "Now then,
head, Boldwood; tail, Teddy.  No, we won't toss money on a
"Toss this hymn-book; there can't be no sinfulness in that,
"Very well.  Open, Boldwood -- shut, Teddy.  No; it's more
likely to fall open.  Open, Teddy -- shut, Boldwood."
The book went fluttering in the air and came down shut.
Bathsheba, a small yawn upon her mouth, took the pen, and
with off-hand serenity directed the missive to Boldwood.
"Now light a candle, Liddy.  Which seal shall we use?
Here's a unicorn's head -- there's nothing in that.  What's
this? -- two doves -- no.  It ought to be something
extraordinary, ought it not, Liddy?  Here's one with a motto
-- I remember it is some funny one, but I can't read it.
We'll try this, and if it doesn't do we'll have another."
A large red seal was duly affixed.  Bathsheba looked closely
"Capital!" she exclaimed, throwing down the letter
frolicsomely.  "'Twould upset the solemnity of a parson and
Liddy looked at the words of the seal, and read --
The same evening the letter was sent, and was duly sorted in
Casterbridge post-office that night, to be returned to
So very idly and unreflectingly was this deed done.  Of love
as a spectacle Bathsheba had a fair knowledge; but of love
AT dusk, on the evening of St. Valentine's Day, Bold-wood
sat down to supper as usual, by a beaming fire of aged logs.
Upon the mantel-shelf before him was a time-piece,
surmounted by a spread eagle, and upon the eagle's wings was
the letter Bathsheba had sent.  Here the bachelor's gaze was
continually fastening itself, till the large red seal became
as a blot of blood on the retina of his eye; and as he ate
and drank he still read in fancy the words thereon, although
The pert injunction was like those crystal substances which,
colourless themselves, assume the tone of objects about
them.  Here, in the quiet of Boldwood's parlour, where
everything that was not grave was extraneous, and where the
atmosphere was that of a Puritan Sunday lasting all the
week, the letter and its dictum changed their tenor from the
thoughtlessness of their origin to a deep solemnity, imbibed
Since the receipt of the missive in the morning, Boldwood
had felt the symmetry of his existence to be slowly getting
distorted in the direction of an ideal passion.  The
disturbance was as the first floating weed to Columbus --
the contemptibly little suggesting possibilities of the
The letter must have had an origin and a motive.  That the
latter was of the smallest magnitude compatible with its
existence at all, Boldwood, of course, did not know.  And
such an explanation did not strike him as a possibility
even.  It is foreign to a mystified condition of mind to
realize of the mystifier that the processes of approving a
course suggested by circumstance, and of striking out a
course from inner impulse, would look the same in the
result.  The vast difference between starting a train of
events, and directing into a particular groove a series
already started, is rarely apparent to the person confounded
When Boldwood went to bed he placed the valentine in the
corner of the looking-glass.  He was conscious of its
presence, even when his back was turned upon it.  It was the
first time in Boldwood's life that such an event had
occurred.  The same fascination that caused him to think it
an act which had a deliberate motive prevented him from
regarding it as an impertinence.  He looked again at the
direction.  The mysterious influences of night invested the
writing with the presence of the unknown writer.  Somebody's
some WOMAN'S -- hand had travelled softly over the paper
bearing his name; her unrevealed eyes had watched every
imagination the while.  Why should she have imagined him?
Her mouth -- were the lips red or pale, plump or creased? --
had curved itself to a certain expression as the pen went on
The vision of the woman writing, as a supplement to the
words written, had no individuality.  She was a misty shape,
and well she might be, considering that her original was at
that moment sound asleep and oblivious of all love and
letter-writing under the sky.  Whenever Boldwood dozed she
took a form, and comparatively ceased to be a vision:  when
he awoke there was the letter justifying the dream.
The moon shone to-night, and its light was not of a
customary kind.  His window admitted only a reflection of
its rays, and the pale sheen had that reversed direction
which snow gives, coming upward and lighting up his ceiling
in an unnatural way, casting shadows in strange places, and
The substance of the epistle had occupied him but little in
comparison with the fact of its arrival.  He suddenly
wondered if anything more might be found in the envelope
than what he had withdrawn.  He jumped out of bed in the
weird light, took the letter, pulled out the flimsy sheet,
shook the envelope -- searched it.  Nothing more was there.
Boldwood looked, as he had a hundred times the preceding
day, at the insistent red seal:  "Marry me," he said aloud.
The solemn and reserved yeoman again closed the letter, and
stuck it in the frame of the glass.  In doing so he caught
sight of his reflected features, wan in expression, and
insubstantial in form.  He saw how closely compressed was
his mouth, and that his eyes were wide-spread and vacant.
Feeling uneasy and dissatisfied with himself for this
Then the dawn drew on.  The full power of the clear heaven
was not equal to that of a cloudy sky at noon, when Boldwood
arose and dressed himself.  He descended the stairs and went
out towards the gate of a field to the east, leaning over
It was one of the usual slow sunrises of this time of the
year, and the sky, pure violet in the zenith, was leaden to
the northward, and murky to the east, where, over the snowy
down or ewe-lease on Weatherbury Upper Farm, and apparently
resting upon the ridge, the only half of the sun yet visible
burnt rayless, like a red and flameless fire shining over a
white hearthstone.  The whole effect resembled a sunset as
In other directions, the fields and sky were so much of one
colour by the snow, that it was difficult in a hasty glance
to tell whereabouts the horizon occurred; and in general
there was here, too, that before-mentioned preternatural
inversion of light and shade which attends the prospect when
the garish brightness commonly in the sky is found on the
earth, and the shades of earth are in the sky.  Over the
west hung the wasting moon, now dull and greenish-yellow,
Boldwood was listlessly noting how the frost had hardened
and glazed the surface of the snow, till it shone in the red
eastern light with the polish of marble; how, in some
portions of the slope, withered grass-bents, encased in
icicles, bristled through the smooth wan coverlet in the
twisted and curved shapes of old Venetian glass; and how the
footprints of a few birds, which had hopped over the snow
whilst it lay in the state of a soft fleece, were now frozen
to a short permanency.  A half-muffled noise of light wheels
interrupted him.  Boldwood turned back into the road.  It
was the mail-cart -- a crazy, two-wheeled vehicle, hardly
heavy enough to resist a puff of wind.  The driver held out
a letter.  Boldwood seized it and opened it, expecting
another anonymous one -- so greatly are people's ideas of
probability a mere sense that precedent will repeat itself.
"I don't think it is for you, sir," said the man, when he
saw Boldwood's action.  "Though there is no name I think it
"Oh -- what a mistake! -- it is not mine.  Nor is it for my
shepherd.  It is for Miss Everdene's. "You had better take
it on to him -- Gabriel Oak -- and say I opened it in
At this moment, on the ridge, up against the blazing sky, a
figure was visible, like the black snuff in the midst of a
candle-flame.  Then it moved and began to bustle about
vigorously from place to place, carrying square skeleton
masses, which were riddled by the same rays.  A small figure
on all fours followed behind.  The tall form was that of
Gabriel Oak; the small one that of George; the articles in
"Wait," said Boldwood. "That's the man on the hill.  I'll
To Boldwood it was now no longer merely a letter to I
another man.  It was an opportunity.  Exhibiting a face
pregnant with intention, he entered the snowy field.
Gabriel, at that minute, descended the hill towards the
right.  The glow stretched down in this direction now, and
touched the distant roof of Warren's Malthouse -- whither
the shepherd was apparently bent:  Boldwood followed at a
THE scarlet and orange light outside the malthouse did not
penetrate to its interior, which was, as usual, lighted by a
rival glow of similar hue, radiating from the hearth.
The maltster, after having lain down in his clothes for a
few hours, was now sitting beside a three-legged table,
breakfasting of bread and bacon.  This was eaten on the
plateless system, which is performed by placing a slice of
bread upon the table, the meat flat upon the bread, a
mustard plaster upon the meat, and a pinch of salt upon the
whole, then cutting them vertically downwards with a large
pocket-knife till wood is reached, when the severed lamp is
impaled on the knife, elevated, and sent the proper way of
The maltster's lack of teeth appeared not to sensibly
diminish his powers as a mill.  He had been without them for
so many years that toothlessness was felt less to be a
defect than hard gums an acquisition.  Indeed, he seemed to
approach the grave as a hyperbolic curve approaches a
straight line -- less directly as he got nearer, till it was
In the ashpit was a heap of potatoes roasting, and a boiling
pipkin of charred bread, called "coffee." for the benefit of
whomsoever should call, for Warren's was a sort of
"I say, says I, we get a fine day, and then down comes a
snapper at night," was a remark now suddenly heard spreading
into the malthouse from the door, which had been opened the
previous moment.  The form of Henery Fray advanced to the
fire, stamping the snow from his boots when about half-way
there.  The speech and entry had not seemed to be at all an
abrupt beginning to the maltster, introductory matter being
often omitted in this neighbourhood, both from word and
deed, and the maltster having the same latitude allowed him,
did not hurry to reply.  He picked up a fragment of cheese,
by pecking upon it with his knife, as a butcher picks up
Henery appeared in a drab kerseymere great-coat, buttoned
over his smock-frock, the white skirts of the latter being
visible to the distance of about a foot below the coat-
tails, which, when you got used to the style of dress,
looked natural enough, and even ornamental -- it certainly
Matthew Moon, Joseph Poorgrass, and other carters and
waggoners followed at his heels, with great lanterns
dangling from their hands, which showed that they had just
come from the cart-horse stables, where they had been busily
"And how is she getting on without a baily?" the maltster
inquired.  Henery shook his head, and smiled one of the
bitter smiles, dragging all the flesh of his forehead into a
"She'll rue it -- surely, surely!" he said "Benjy Pennyways
were not a true man or an honest baily -- as big a betrayer
as Judas Iscariot himself.  But to think she can carr' on
alone!" He allowed his head to swing laterally three or four
times in silence.  "Never in all my creeping up -- never!"
This was recognized by all as the conclusion of some gloomy
speech which had been expressed in thought alone during the
shake of the head; Henery meanwhile retained several marks
of despair upon his face, to imply that they would be
required for use again directly he should go on speaking.
"All will be ruined, and ourselves too, or there's no meat
"A headstrong maid, that's what she is -- and won't listen
to no advice at all.  Pride and vanity have ruined many a
cobbler's dog.  Dear, dear, when I think o' it, I sorrows
"True, Henery, you do, I've heard ye," said Joseph Poorgrass
in a voice of thorough attestation, and with a wire-drawn
"'Twould do a martel man no harm to have what's under her
bonnet," said Billy Smallbury, who had just entered, bearing
his one tooth before him.  "She can spaik real language, and
must have some sense somewhere.  Do ye foller me?"
"I do, I do; but no baily -- I deserved that place," wailed
Henery, signifying wasted genius by gazing blankly at
visions of a high destiny apparently visible to him on Billy
Smallbury's smock-frock.  "There, 'twas to be, I suppose.
Your lot is your lot, and Scripture is nothing; for if you
do good you don't get rewarded according to your works, but
be cheated in some mean way out of your recompense."
"No, no; I don't agree with'ee there," said Mark Clark.
"Good works good pay, so to speak it," attested Joseph
A short pause ensued, and as a sort of ENTR'ACTE Henery
turned and blew out the lanterns, which the increase of
